《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十輯 蘇彥圖主編
                                                                                    1
臺北 中央研究院法律學研究所 法學叢書 (5)
民國 109 年 7 月，頁 1-23


  Judges as Guardians of the Constitution＊

                           Keynote Speech

                  (Delivered on December 17, 2015)


                                                    ＊＊
                               Aharon Barak

                                     Contents

     Deciding Disputes                            On Proportionality
     Judicial lawmaking                           On Standing
     Judicial discretion                          Comparative law
     On the Role of A Judge                       On Legal and Judicial
     The Legitimacy of the Means                     philosophy
     On Interpretation                            Final Remarks




＊   This keynote speech has been rewritten and published as “On Judging” in JUDGES
    AS GUARDIANS OF CONSTITUTIONALISM AND HUMAN RIGHTS (Martin Scheinin, Helle
    Krunke, and Marina Aksenova, eds., 2016), pp. 27-49, Edward Elgar Publishing.
＊＊ Former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Isreal.
    Online: http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/70611091.pdf.
2                                         《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十輯



    Deciding Disputes
     The principal function of the judicial branch is resolving disputes.
While resolving a dispute, and as byproduct of that, the judicial branch
must determine the law according to which the dispute is settled. The
extent to which it determines the law while resolving the dispute varies
from one legal system to another, and is derived from its tradition and
culture.

     In many cases, determining the law according to which the dispute
is to be settled does not entail any judicial creativity whatsoever. The
meaning of the law before and after the dispute’s resolution is the same.
In determining what that law is, the judge merely states the existing law.
The judge’s interpretation is declarative and not creative. Only in the
small minority of cases does the interpretation of the law involve judicial
creativity. In these cases, the meaning of the law prior to and after the
dispute’s resolution is not the same. The judges do not merely declare
what the existing law says; they create new understanding of the law. In
such cases, the judge engages—incidentally to deciding the case—in
judicial lawmaking. Such lawmaking does not just create an individual
legal norm, whose only power is in the resolution of the dispute between
the parties; it creates a general legal norm, whether through the force of
the principle of stare decisis, or other recognized techniques that
obligates not only the parties to the dispute, but all branches of the
government and members of the public.

    Judicial lawmaking
     What is the anatomy of judicial lawmaking? It varies according to
the kind of legal activity being carried out. The main judicial activity in
Keynote Speech: Judges as Guardians of the Constitution                     3


modern times is the interpretation of a legal text (e.g., constitution,
statute, regulation, contract, will), according to which the dispute is to be
resolved. Interpretation is a rational activity giving legal meaning to a
text. Interpretation, at times (but not always), involves judicial creativity.
The meaning of a text before the act of interpretation, and its meaning
afterwards, is not one and the same. The reason for this can be found in
the character of normative texts, which, just like any other text, is at
times ambiguous and vague regarding a given set of factual
circumstances. This ambiguity and vagueness is usually clarified via the
rules of interpretation, which succeed—without turning to judicial
creativity—in extracting, from the various express or implied literal
meanings of the normative text, a single legal meaning. However, the
rules of interpretation do not always succeed in performing such
extraction without any creativity whatsoever. At times, the success of the
extraction—that is, the determination of a single legal meaning from the
spectrum of literal meanings—requires creative judicial activity. This
creativity is necessary when the employment of the rules of
interpretation do not bring forth one single meaning. In such a situation,
the rules of interpretation require the judge—interpreter to continue the
process of interpretation—to move on from the declarative stage to the
creative stage by the use of judicial discretion.

     Judicial discretion
     Judicial discretion does not mean mere consideration, reflection or
thought. It means choosing between several legitimate opinions. As such,
it is a normative process. In each legal system there are cases in which a
judge faces a situation in which, on the one hand, the system requires to
interpret the legal text according to which the dispute will be decided,
but on the other hand, the system does not force to choose a particular
4                                           《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十輯



option from the spectrum of possibilities. These are the “hard cases.”
How will a judge know that in a certain situation, there is judicial
discretion? When will a judge determine that two or more options are
legal, in such a manner that the choice between them requires judicial
discretion? My answer is that the existence of judicial discretion is the
result of the legal community’s view in a given legal system. The legal
community is a normative concept that reflects the fundamental views,
principles, rules of interpretation, and social consensus regarding the
judicial activity in a given society at a given time. An option is legal if it
is viewed as such by the legal community.

     Judicial discretion is necessary. It is impossible to build a legal
interpretive system without judicial discretion. If a legal norm is
embodied in a literal text, the interpretation process is necessary, and
every interpretation process requires the recognition of judicial
discretion. Judicial interpretation without judicial discretion is a myth.
The ambiguous and vague nature of language (including the language
and rules of interpretation), and the lack of consensus regarding the rules
of interpretation, their sources and the internal relationships between
them, require the recognition of interpretative discretion. Human
wisdom cannot create a general legal principle that can provide an
unequivocal answer without the use of discretion, regarding the infinite
amount of situations (some of which cannot be expected in advance) to
which a principle may apply.

    On the Role of A Judge
     In exercising their discretion, judges should aim, though they are
not obliged to, to achieve two main objectives: The first is to bridge the
gap between law and life. Thus when interpreting a constitution or a
Keynote Speech: Judges as Guardians of the Constitution                     5


statute, the judges should give the text a dynamic meaning, one that
strives to bridge the gap between law and life’s changing reality without
changing the text itself. In doing so, judges must balance the need for
change with the need for stability. Professor Roscoe Pound expressed
this well more than ninety years ago: “Hence all thinking about law has
struggled to reconcile the conflicting demands of the need of stability
and of the need of change. Law must be stable and yet it cannot stand
still.”

      Stability without change is decline. Change without stability is
anarchy. The role of a judge is to help bridge the gap between the needs
of society and the law without allowing the legal system to decline or
collapse into anarchy. The judge must ensure stability with change, and
change with stability. Like the eagle in the sky, maintaining stability only
when moving, so too is the law stable only when moving. Achieving this
goal is very difficult. The law’s life is complex. It is not mere logic. It is
not simply experience. It is both logic and experience together. The law’s
evolution throughout history must be cautious. The choice is not one
between stability and change. It is a question of how fast the change
occurs. The choice is not between rigidity and flexibility. It is a question
of the degree of flexibility.

      The judge’s second objective should be—though they are not
obliged—to protect the constitution and democracy. If we want to
preserve democracy, we cannot take its existence for granted. We must
fight for it. The assumption that “it won’t happen to us” can no longer be
accepted. Anything can happen. If democracy was disallowed and
destroyed in the Germany of Kant, Beethoven, and Goethe, it can
happen anywhere. If we do not protect democracy, democracy will not
protect us. I do not know whether the judges in Germany could have
6                                          《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十輯



prevented Hitler from coming to power in the 1930s, but I do know that
the lessons of the Holocaust and of the World War II era helped promote
the idea of judicial review of legislative action and made human rights
crucial. These lessons led to the recognition of the defensive democracy
and even the militant democracy. It shaped my belief that one of the two
roles of the judge in a democracy is to maintain and protect the
constitution and democracy.

     I believe that the protection of democracy is a priority for many
judges in modern democracies. The judicial protection of democracy, in
general, and of human rights in particular, is a characteristic of most
developing democracies. Legal scholars often explain this phenomenon
as an increase in judicial power relative to other powers in society. This
change, however, is merely a side effect. The purpose of this modern
development is not to increase the power of the court in a democracy but
rather to increase the protection of democracy and human rights. An
increase in judicial power is an inevitable result, because judicial power
is one of the many factors in the democratic balance.

    The Legitimacy of the Means
     The means of realizing the judicial role must be legitimate; the
principle of the rule of law applies first and foremost to judges
themselves, who do not share the legislature’s freedom in freely creating
new tools. The bricks with which judges build their structures are limited.
Their power to fulfill their role depends on their ability to design new
structures with the same old bricks, or to create in their limited discretion
new bricks.
Keynote Speech: Judges as Guardians of the Constitution                   7


     On Interpretation
     The supreme or constitutional courts’ main activity is interpretation.
This is true of both civil law and in common law legal systems. The key
question is what is the proper system of interpretation? Neither common
law nor civil law systems have a satisfying answer to that question. It
seems to me that the solution lies in the answer to another question:
What is the aim of interpretation? My answer is that interpretation’s aim
is to realize the law’s purpose. Hence, my theory of interpretation is the
purposive theory of interpretation. In constitutional law it means, that the
purpose of the constitutional text is its subjective-historical purpose and
its objective-modern purpose. How should the constitution be interpreted
when the subjective purpose conflicts with the objective purpose? The
answer to that question lies in the unique character of the constitution. A
constitution enshrines a special kind of norm and is found at the top of
the normative pyramid. Difficult to amend, it is designed to direct human
behavior for years to come. It shapes the state’s aspirations throughout
history. It determines the state’s fundamental political views. It lays the
foundation for its social values. It determines its commitments and
orientations. It reflects the events of the past. It lays the foundation for
the present. It determines how the future will look. It is philosophy,
politics, society, and law all in one.

     How does a constitution’s unique character affect its interpretation?
In determining the purpose of a constitution, how does its distinctive
nature affect the relationship between its subjective and objective
elements? My answer is this: one should take both the subjective and
objective elements into account when determining the purpose of the
constitution. The framers’ original intent at the time of drafting and the
original public understanding of that time is important. One cannot
8                                          《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十輯



understand the present without understanding the past. The original
intent and the original public understanding lend historical depth to
understanding the text in a way that honors the past. The original intent
and the original public understanding, however, exist alongside the
fundamental views and values of modern society at the time of
interpretation. The constitution is intended to solve the problems of the
contemporary person and to protect human dignity. Therefore, in
determining the constitution’s purpose through interpretation, one must
also take into account the values and principles that prevail at the time of
interpretation,   seeking   synthesis    and    harmony     between     past
understanding and present principles.

     We return, then to the question: What is the proper relationship
between the subjective and objective elements in determining the
purpose of the constitution when the subjective and the objective pull in
different directions? In my opinion, greater weight should be accorded to
the objective modern purposes. Only by preferring the objective modern
elements can the constitution fulfill its purpose. Only in this way is it
possible to guide human behavior through generations of social change.
Only in this way is it possible to balance the past, present and future.
Only in this way can the constitution provide answers to modern needs.
Admittedly, the past influences the present, but it does not determine it.
The past guides the present, but it does not enslave it. Fundamental
social views, derived from the past and woven into social and legal
history, find their modern expression in the old constitutional text.

     Many courts have issued opinions in the same spirit, including the
Canadian Supreme Court, the Australian High Court, the Israeli Supreme
Court and the German Constitutional Court. This is the purposive
interpretation that I espouse. It does not ignore the subjective purpose or
Keynote Speech: Judges as Guardians of the Constitution                    9


the original public understanding in constitutional interpretation, but it
does not give it controlling precedence either. The weight of the
subjective purpose or the public original understanding decreases as the
constitution ages and becomes more difficult to change. In interpreting
such constitutions, the preferred objective modern purpose reflects
deeply held modern views in the legal system’s movement through
history. The constitution thus becomes a living norm—a living tree—
preventing the enslavement of the present to the past.

     This approach was not adopted in the United States. There is hardly
a consensus regarding the proper weight to be accorded to past
interpretations. Instead, in the United States, the competing notions of
original intent of the founding fathers (also known as “intentionalism”),
the original public understanding of the terms used in the Constitution
(“originalism”), and the “living constitution” are all sources of an
ongoing debate in academic writing and on the bench. Indeed, the
United States Supreme Court itself is—and has been for years—divided
on this issue. The entire corpus of America constitutional law finds itself
in a state of crisis due to this lack of consensus. Without accord in the
legal community about the proper role that original intent, original
understanding, and current notions of constitutional interpretation should
play in determining the meaning of constitutional provisions today, the
entire constitutional system is hanging in the balance. A crisis of this sort
has been avoided in Canada, Australia, Germany and Israel. Hopefully
other constitutional legal systems will successfully avoid this dangerous
situation, which may tear apart the legal system as well as focus all legal
energy on the crisis.
10                                          《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十輯



     On Proportionality
     Proportionality is a very important tool to realize the judicial role.
The formal role of proportionality is to ensure that a sub-constitutional
norm limiting a constitutional right fulfills its four elements. If those
elements are not fulfilled, the sub-constitutional norm will lack the force
to limit the constitutional right, for a higher norm trumps a lower norm.
In effect, then, the formal role of proportionality is to overcome the
results of the constitutional norm’s superiority. It follows that where a
constitutional right is limited by another constitutional norm, the four
elements of proportionality do not apply. The clash will be resolved not
on the constitutional level but on the sub-constitutional level.

     Proportionality is a legal construct. It puts in place four elements
whose fulfillment will allow a limitation placed on a constitutional right
by a sub-constitutional norm to be found constitutional. Every legal
system that adopts proportionality must determine for itself, however,
how the elements of proportionality are to be satisfied. In reaching such
a conclusion, the legal system will be expressing its society’s
understanding of democracy. The conclusion will be derived from its
position on the importance of constitutional rights and their relationship
to the public interest and will reflect its approach to separation of powers
and the role of each branch of government. Proportionality, then, is a
framework that must be filled with content. The framework sets the four
elements that must be fulfilled, but the content of those elements will be
determined by a set of considerations that are external to proportionality
and that inform it. That content therefore may vary from one legal
system to another. But note: proportionality is not neutral with respect to
human rights, and it is not indifferent to their limitation. It is grounded in
the need to realize human rights. The limitations that proportionality
Keynote Speech: Judges as Guardians of the Constitution                 11


imposes on the realization of constitutional rights draw their substance
from the same source as the rights themselves; they are grounded in the
society’s understanding of democracy.

     In sum, the elements of proportionality reflect the idea that a sub-
constitutional norm may impose limits on a constitutional right, but that
those limits are themselves bounded. This is the concept of “limits on the
limitations”.

     The four elements of proportionality pertain with respect both to
negative rights and to positive rights. Negative rights define the
limitations on a constitutional right that the state is precluded from
imposing. Positive rights define the actions that the state is obligated to
take in order to protect a constitutional right. With regard to negative
rights, proportionality examines whether the limitation imposed by a law
on the full realization of a constitutional right is proportional. With
regard to positive rights, proportionality examines whether the failure to
protect the full scope of the constitutional right is proportional. In both
cases, the four elements noted above apply.

     1. Proper purpose
     The first element of proportionality requires that a law limiting a
constitutional right have a proper purpose. This is a threshold
requirement that does not entail concrete balancing. It is generally
acknowledged that a limitation on a constitutional right is constitutional
if it is intended to protect other rights (constitutional or sub-
constitutional). One enters a grey area with respect to proper purpose,
however, when the constitutional right is to be limited to promote the
public interest. What public interest can justify limiting a constitutional
right? At times, the constitution itself will specify the public interests
12                                         《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十輯



whose realization will warrant limiting certain constitutional rights. But
what does one do when the constitution says nothing in that regard?
German constitutional law regards it as sufficient that the public interest
not be contrary to the constitution. Canadian constitutional law, in
contrast, requires that the public interest be pressing and substantial. In
both systems, the requirement of proper purpose applies to all
constitutional rights, without any effort to distinguish among rights on
the basis of their importance.

     2. Rational Connection
     The second component of proportionality is that the means adopted
by the law must be capable of advancing the realization of its proper
purpose. This does not require that the means be the only one that can
attain the purpose, or that it realize the purpose in full, or that it do so
efficiently. The requirement is that the means have the potential to
advance the purpose to some extent that is not merely marginal, scant, or
theoretical.

     3. Necessity
     The third component of proportionality requires that the proper
purpose not be attainable by some other means less restrictive of the
constitutional right. If there exists some equally effective alternative that
would entail less of a limitation on the constitutional right, the law in
question is not necessary. If, however, the alternative would intrude less
on the constitutional right but would be able to attain the law’s proper
purpose only in part, the law would be necessary. It would be necessary
as well if the alternative, though able to attain the law’s proper purpose
in full, would limit some other right or impair some other public interest.
Accordingly, the law is necessary if an alternative is less restrictive of
Keynote Speech: Judges as Guardians of the Constitution                   13


the constitutional right but more costly. Of course, rejection of those
alternatives may not pass muster under the balancing test required by the
fourth element of proportionality (proportionality stricto sensu).

     The necessity test requires that the means selected by the law be
tailored to realizing the proper purpose. One “cannot shoot a sparraws
with a canon”; The means must be suited to the ends. When the purpose
can be attained by a means less restrictive of constitutional rights that
means should be selected, and there is no necessity for the law under
review. But while over-inclusiveness should be avoided, it becomes
necessary when it is impossible to separate the narrower measures
needed to realize the law’s purpose from those that are over-inclusive. In
these circumstances, the over-inclusiveness is dealt with in the context of
the fourth component, that of balancing. As an example, consider a law
whose purpose is to protect the public interest and the rights of the
individual against terrorists. Given the inability to distinguish a terrorist
from a non-terrorist by individual examination, a general prohibition
may be imposed that affects the rights of non-terrorists as well. That
inability to rely on individual examination (which imposes less of a
limitation on the constitutional right) transforms the general prohibition
(which limits the constitutional right comprehensively) into something
necessary.

     4. Proportionality Stricto Sensu—Balancing

       a. The Social Importance of the Purpose and of Avoiding the
          Limitation on the Constitutional right
     The fourth element of proportionality requires a proper relationship
between the social benefit of realizing the proper purpose and the social
benefit of avoiding the limitation of the constitutional right. The element
14                                        《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十輯



of rational connection and the element of necessity deal with the
relationship between the law’s purpose and the means it adopts for
realizing that purpose. The means-ends analysis conducted at that stage
does not consider whether attaining the purpose is worth the associated
limitation on the constitutional right; it is not based on balancing. But
things are quite different when we come to proportionality stricto sensu.
At that stage, we examine the relationship between the law’s purpose
and the constitutional rights that are affected, and that examination
entails balancing.

     To speak of “balancing” is to speak metaphorically, but the mode of
thought is normative. It is based on legal rules that determine when a
proper purpose may be realized despite the limitation on a constitutional
right. There is no consensus, however, regarding the substance of those
legal rules. In my view, they should be based on a balancing of the social
importance of the benefit gained by realizing the purpose (protecting
rights or promoting the public interest) on the one hand and, on the other,
the social importance of avoiding the limitation on the constitutional
right.

     The comparison does not consider the overall importance of the
purpose or the overall importance of the constitutional right being
limited. Rather, the comparison is between the status of the purpose and
the status of the right before and after the limiting law. The social
importance of the law’s marginal effect on attainment of the purpose is
balanced against the social importance of avoiding the law’s marginal
limitation of the right. The comparison, then, is made in terms of
marginal social utility.

     On occasion, the scope of the comparison is even narrower. That is
Keynote Speech: Judges as Guardians of the Constitution                  15


so when the inquiry into necessity considers an alternative less
restrictive of the constitutional right but unable to realize in full the
purpose of the law. Because it cannot realize the purpose in full, the less
restrictive alternative does not preclude a finding of necessity.
Nevertheless, insofar as the alternative is proportional, it may strike the
proper balance between the importance of the marginal utility of
realizing the purpose and the importance of the marginal utility of
avoiding limitation of the right.

     The social importance of the marginal benefit in realizing the
purpose depends on the nature of the purpose. Not all proper purposes
are of equal social importance. When the purpose is protection of a
constitutional right, the marginal social benefit depends on the
importance of the protected right. When the purpose is protection of a
public interest, the marginal social benefit depends on the importance of
attaining the purpose. That importance—with respect both to the
protection of constitutional rights and to the advancing of the public
interest—will be a function of the social history of the state, its socio-
political ideology, its political and governmental structure, and its
commitment to democratic values. In dealing with these matters, it is
necessary to see society and its normative structure as a whole.

     In determining the social importance of the marginal benefit in
realizing the purpose, we must take account—when the purpose is
protection of human rights—of the degree of protection these rights
enjoyed before the law and the protection they will be afforded under the
law. That is the case as well with social purposes related to promoting a
public interest. In all of these, we should consider the likelihood that the
purpose will be realized if the law is allowed to stand. That likelihood
depends on the factual situation and on a prognosis regarding the
16                                         《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十輯



possibility that the purpose will be realized.

     The social importance of avoiding the limitation of the
constitutional right depends on the social importance of the right. The
key question here is whether all constitutional rights are of equal social
importance. That is an issue on which there is no consensus. I believe
that all constitutional rights are not equal with respect to their social
importance. The importance of a constitutional right is determined on the
basis   of   both   external    and   internal   considerations.    External
considerations include the society’s basic concepts, its social and cultural
history, and its particular character. That sort of external background
allows us, for example, to understand the great importance assigned in
post-Nazi Germany and post-apartheid South Africa to the values of
human dignity and equality. Internal considerations take account of the
relationships among the various rights. In that sense, a right that serves
as a precondition to the existence and operation of another right is
regarded as the more important of the two. Hence the high social
importance of the rights to life, dignity, equality, and political expression.

     The social importance of avoiding the limitation of a right is
influenced by the scope of the limitation and its extent. The severity of
the limitation also bears on the social importance of avoiding it. A
limitation on one right, accordingly, is not the same as a limitation on
several; a limitation that approaches the core of a right is not the same as
one that affects it only on its margins; a permanent limitation is not the
same as a temporary one; and a limitation very likely to eventuate is not
the same as one whose probability of realization is more remote.

        b. The Rule of Balancing
     The balance between the marginal social benefit in realizing the
Keynote Speech: Judges as Guardians of the Constitution                  17


purpose and the marginal social benefit in avoiding the limitation on the
constitutional right can be expressed as follows: as the importance of
avoiding the marginal limitation on the constitutional right and the
likelihood of the limitation coming to pass increase, so do the required
importance of the marginal benefit to the public interest or the
competing private right and the required likelihood of that benefit being
realized.

     What happens if the balance is even, and the marginal social
importance of achieving the purpose equals the marginal importance of
avoiding the limitation on the constitutional right? The solution flows
from fundamental concepts of constitutional democracy, regarding
which there are likely to be differing and even conflicting opinions. It
seems to me that where one constitutional right is limited in order to
protect another, there is no reason to impugn the constitutionality of the
limiting legislation. Where, however, the constitutional right is limited in
order to advance the public interest, the constitutional right should be
afforded priority: in dubio pro libertate.

     Many may disagree with me on proportionality and the role of the
court in proportionality. To these critics, my only answer is: I am aware
of your criticism, but I have not found a better system. It is my view that
if we take human rights seriously, we should accept proportionality and
judicial discretion in proportionality.

     On Standing
     The rules of standing are central in the performance of the judicial
role. They are a vital tool in bridging the gap between law and society,
and in protecting the constitution and democracy. Tell me what your
views on standing are and I will tell you what your views on judging are.
18                                        《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十輯



     My position is that anyone should have legal standing to question
the legality of any state action. Locking the gates of the court before a
petitioner without any special interest who is arguing against an illegal
state action harms the enforcement of the law. Where there is no rule by
judge, there is no rule of law. Law is replaced by power. The ability to
access the court is the cornerstone of democracy. A public agency is a
fiduciary that acts for the sake of the individual. In the areas of public
law, each individual has the right that state actins remain within the
framework of the law. The constitution of South Africa makes it clear by
providing that:

     “Everyone has the right to administrative action that is lawful,
reasonable and procedurally fair.”

     The South African Constitution goes on to state that “anyone acting
in the public interest has the right to approach a competent court,
alleging that a right in the Bill of Rights has been infringed or
threatened.”

     Behind my views about standing is the recognition that every
individual has an interest in a government that acts according to the law,
and that such an interest is protected by the law. Indeed, the laws of
standing turn the individual’s interest in a government that acts
according to the law, into the constitutional right of the individual that
the government act legally. This is the importance of the laws of
standing. They are not simply a procedural means to regulate the flow of
the court’s docket. They are a central tool for ensuring the bridging of
law and life and protecting the constitution and democracy.
Keynote Speech: Judges as Guardians of the Constitution                  19


     Comparative law
     I have found comparative law to be of great assistance in realizing
my role as a judge. The case law of the courts of the United States,
Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom and Germany have helped me
significantly in finding the right path to follow. Indeed, comparing
oneself to others allows for greater self-awareness. With comparative
law, the judge expands the horizon and the interpretive landscape.
Comparative law enriches the options available to us. In different legal
systems, similar legal institutions often fulfill corresponding roles, and
similar legal problems (such as hate speech, privacy, abortion and the
fight against terrorism) arise. To the extent that these similarities exist,
comparative law becomes an important tool with which judges fulfill
their role in democracy. Moreover, because many of the basic principles
of democracy are common to democratic countries, there is good reason
to compare them as well. Indeed, different democratic legal systems
often encounter similar problems. Examining a foreign solution may
help a judge choose the best local solution. This usefulness applies both
to the development of the common law and to the interpretation of legal
texts.

     Naturally, one must approach comparative law cautiously,
remaining cognizant of its limitations. Comparative law is not merely
the comparison of laws. A useful comparison can exist only if the legal
systems have a common ideological foundation. The judge must be
sensitive to the uniqueness of each legal system. Nonetheless, when the
judge is convinced that the relative social, historical and religious
circumstances create a common ideological basis, it is possible to refer
to a foreign legal system for a source of comparison and inspiration.
Indeed, the importance of comparative law lies in extending the judge’s
20                                          《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十輯



horizons. Comparative law awakens judges to the latent potential of their
own legal systems. It informs judges about the successes and failures
that may result from adopting a particular legal solution. It refers judges
to the relationship between a solution to the legal problem before them
and other legal problems. Thus, comparative law acts as an experienced
friend. Of course, there is no obligation to refer to comparative law. Thus
the South African Constitution provides that when courts interpret the
Bill of Rights they “must consider international law and may consider
foreign law.” Additionally, even when comparative law is consulted, the
final decision must always be local. The benefit of comparative law is an
expanding judicial thinking about the possible arguments, legal trends,
and decision-making structures available.

     This measured approach towards the use of comparative
constitutional law is not shared by all; in particular, the issue has created
a deep rift within the American legal system. There, the “originalist”
camp—supporting the notion that the original understanding should
govern the interpretation of the constitutional text—strenuously opposes
the idea of considering any comparative or foreign law not part of such
understanding. Despite that, the pattern in American law seems to have
moved in the direction of more openness towards foreign and
comparative law. It is hoped the Court will proceed in this direction.

     On Legal and Judicial philosophy
     While working as a judge, I have found that a good philosophy is a
very practical tool in solving hard cases. A philosophy of life and a
philosophy of law assists the judge in understanding life and law. As to
philosophy of law, I found myself having an eclectic approach. It
contains components from each of the main theoretical doctrines. In my
Keynote Speech: Judges as Guardians of the Constitution               21


opinion, the relationship between members of society, and between
society and its members, is complicated and complex to the extent that it
cannot be described by one single point of view. Human experience is
too rich to be limited to one theory. In my opinion, the naturalists, the
positivists, the realists and the neo-realists, the members of the
historical—economic or sociological schools—all reflect, from different
angles, the amassed human experience. Each of them has truth in it. One
can “theoretically” agree with each of them, but there arises a need to
balance between the various views. According to my approach, the
solution is not found in one single independent theory. One must take
certain components from each of the main theories, while determining a
proper balance between them. None of the theories can remain pure.
Balancing is always needed. It may be that this eclectic philosophy is a
philosophy in and of itself. Whatever the case may be, in my opinion,
the law, as a normative system, has a role in society. It is intended to
ensure functional social life. It contains order and security alongside
justice and morals. My pluralistic approach teaches me that there is no
consensus regarding the relative weight of these values, and that
different people have different opinions on the subject. The democratic
form of government determines which institutions and organs are
assigned the role of determining such relative weight.

     Most importantly for judges is to articulate to themselves their
judicial philosophy. By judicial philosophy I mean a system of
nonobligatory considerations that will guide the judge in exercising his
discretion. These are a set of thoughts about how to exercise discretion
in hard cases. Judicial philosophy is an organized thought about the way
in which a judge is to contend with the complexities of a hard case. In
my experience, the majority of judges have such a judicial philosophy.
22                                        《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十輯



For most, it is an unconscious philosophy. I strived to raise judicial
philosophy into the realm of consciousness and subject it to public
critique.

     Judge’s judicial philosophy is closely intertwined with their
personal experience. It is influenced by their education and personality.
Some judges are more cautious and others are less so. There are judges
that are more readily influenced by a certain kind of claim than others.
Some judges require a heavy ‘burden of proof’ in order to depart from
existing law, while others require a lighter ‘burden of proof’ in order to
do so. Every judge has a complex life experience that influences his or
her approach to life, and therefore influences their approach to law.
There are judges for whom considerations of national security or
individual freedoms are weightier than for other judges. There are judges
whose personal makeup obligates order, and as a result, they require an
organic development and evolution of the law. There are judges whose
personalities place great importance on the proper solution, even if they
reach that solution in a non-evolutionary fashion. There are judges who
give special weight to considerations of justice in the general sphere,
even if it creates injustice in the individual case. Other judges emphasize
justice in the individual case even if it does not fit in with the general
justice found at the basis of the norm.

     One must always remember that judicial philosophy is relevant
only if the judge has judicial discretion. It works only in those cases
where the legal problem has more than one legal solution. It is relevant
only in the hard cases. It is the main compass that directs judges
(consciously or unconsciously) in shaping the solution to the hard cases
with which they are confronted. Professor Freund wrote that “the most
important thing about a judge is his philosophy; and if it be dangerous
Keynote Speech: Judges as Guardians of the Constitution                23


for him to have one, it is at all events less dangerous than the self-
deception of having none.”

     Final Remarks
     I regarded myself as a judge who was sensitive to his role in a
democracy. I took seriously the tasks imposed upon me; to bridge the
gap between law and society and to protect the constitution and
democracy. Despite frequent criticism—and it frequently descends to the
level of personal attacks and threats of violence—I have continued on
this path for twenty eight years. I hope that by doing so, I was serving
my legal system properly. Indeed, judges in highest courts must continue
on their paths according to their consciences. Judges are guided by their
North Star: the fundamental values and principles of constitutional
democracy. They bear a heavy responsibility on their shoulders. But
even in hard times, they must remain true to themselves. I discussed this
duty in an opinion considering whether torture may be used on a terrorist
in “ticking bomb” situations. My answer—and the answer of the court—
was no. In my judgment I wrote:

     Deciding these applications has been difficult for us. True, from the
legal perspective, the road before us is smooth. We are, however, part of
Israeli society. We know its problems and we live its history. We are
aware of the harsh reality of terrorism in which we are, at times,
immersed. The fear that our ruling will prevent us from properly dealing
with terrorists troubles us. But we are judges. We demand that others act
according to law. This too, is the demand we make of ourselves. When
we sit at trial, we stand on trial.
