    Invited Article
 Academia Sinica Law Journal                                                              1
 Issue 27, pp. 1–28 (September 2020)



                   Judges’ Conscience and
                                          ＊
                  Constitutional Reasoning

                                   長谷部恭男＊＊



                                        Contents

  I.    Introduction
  II.   Various meanings of morality
  III. Kelsen’s legacy?
  IV. Law and morality
  V.    A digression on Kelsen’s theory on legal reasoning
  VI. Authority of the constitution
  VII. A digression on Dworkin’s interpretive theory
  VIII. Where does judges’ conscience lead us?




＊  Submission Date: September 18, 2019. [Line Editor: Ya-Wen Cheng].
   This chapter was read at Institutum Iurisprudentiae Academia Sinica, Taipei, in
   September 2019. I am grateful to all the participants there, in particular, the director
   Chien-Liang Lee, Yen-Tu Su, Cheng-Yi Huang, Tzung-Mou Wu, and Tzu-Yi Lin.
＊＊ Professor, School of Law, Waseda University.（日本早稻田大學法學院教授。）
   Online: http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/31117002.pdf.
2                                         《中研院法學期刊》第27期（2020年9月）



I. Introduction

      Article 76, clause 3 of the constitution of Japan states that: “All
judges shall be independent in the exercise of their conscience and shall
                                                                 1
be bound only by this constitution and the laws.” Legal historians
would point out the possibility that the concept of “conscience” might
have derived from the Anglo-Saxon idea of equity, which is dubbed as
                                  2
“the conscience of the law.” Some might suggest possible influences of
                         3
natural law tradition.

      However, the idea of equity has not been widespread in Japan, and
natural law theorists are scarce resources in the land of the rising sun.
The dispute around the concept of judges’ conscience has been
crystallized into the opposition between two theses: the objective and the
subjective conscience doctrines. No judicial precedent tells us which the
                    4
right answer is. This may seem quite a parochial issue in a small
country in East Asia, but I think this study will shed light on some


1 The Japanese text of the article does not correspond precisely to this official
  translation. It states: “All judges shall be, in obedience to their conscience,
  independent in exercising their functions, and shall be bound only by this constitution
  and the laws.”
2 See SARAH WORTHINGTON, EQUITY 299–302 (2003), critically analysing the idea that
  equity is to be distinguished from common law as it is conscience-based, moral, and
  discretionary.
3 See HAROLD BERMAN, LAW AND REVOLUTION II: THE IMPACT OF THE PROTESTANT
  REFORMATIONS ON THE WESTERN LEGAL TRADITION 74–75 (2003). Berman pointed
  out that while for the scholastics “reason (synderesis)” was a superior cognitive
  faculty and “conscience (conscientia)” was an inferior practical or applicable skill,
  Martin Luther subordinated reason to conscience.
4 See Saikō Saibansho [Sup. Ct.] Nov. 17, 1948, Showa 22 (re) no. 337, 2 Saikō
  Saibansho keiji hanreishū [Keishū] 1565, the holding of which is ambiguous and can
  be understood in different ways. The Court bluntly held that article 76 demands that
  judges deliver decisions in accordance with their inner conscience and sense of
  morality. Both doctrines refer to this ruling as their corroboration.
Judges’ Conscience and Constitutional Reasoning                              3


aspects of constitutional reasoning with widely applicable implications.

     The objective conscience doctrine argues that the “conscience” here
means objective laws, that is, “this constitution and the laws.” It suggests
that the words, “in the exercise of their conscience”, are redundant, and
mean nothing. If judges rely on their own conscience in delivering
judgements, they may deviate from objective laws, which would amount
to the negation of the rule of law, as argued by the supporters of this
doctrine. When established law stipulates that a person who committed
murder under certain circumstances should be punished by the death
penalty, judges should decide so even if they are in their conscience
against death penalty. This objective conscience doctrine has been
                                                  5
supported by most legal scholars in Japan.

     A few scholars support the subjective conscience doctrine. One of
them is Ryuichi Hirano, who was the president of the University of
Tokyo (1981–1985). Hirano pointed out that article 19 of the constitution
states that: “Freedom of thought and conscience shall not be violated.”
The “conscience” here obviously refers to the personal conscience of
each person. Individuals hold various thoughts and worldviews that may
conflict with each other. Thus, freedom of conscience should be
guaranteed. Hirano argued that the word “conscience” in both articles
should be understood as identical. “Conscience means one and the same
                                     6
for everyone at every occasion.” Does such a view entail the negation


5 See, e.g., SHIRŌ KIYOMIYA, KENPŌ I [CONSTITUTIONAL LAW I] 357 (3d ed. 1979)（清
  宮四郎，憲法I，3版，頁357（1979年））; TOSHIYOSHI MIYAZAWA, NIHONKOKU-
  KENPŌ [THE CONSTITUTION OF JAPAN] 606 (Revised ed. 1978)（宮沢俊義，全訂日
  本国憲法，改訂版，頁606（1978年））; HAJIME KANEKO & MORIO TAKESHITA,
  SAIBANHŌ [THE LAWS CONCERNING THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE] 110–11 (4th ed.
  1999)（兼子一、竹下守夫，裁判法，4版，頁110-111（1999年）                           ）.
6 RYUICHI HIRANO, KEIJI SOSHŌ-HŌ [CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE] 53 (1958)（平野
4                                         《中研院法學期刊》第27期（2020年9月）



of the rule of law? Hirano says it does not. When the law is clear and
established, judges should obey and apply them. If the law states that an
accused should be punished by the death penalty and the conscience of
the judge in charge prohibits her from delivering the death sentence, she
must choose either to deliver the death sentence or resign from the
judgeship.

      Then, after all, there appears to be little difference between both
doctrines. Hirano argued that the conscience of judges works in cases of
gaps (lacunae) in the law. When a judge cannot tell what the law orders
her to do because of the lack of clarity of relevant texts or the conflicts
of various legal sources, she cannot but have recourse to her own
                                                        7
conscience on what decision she should make.

      If the subjective conscience doctrine makes only such a restrictive
claim, it appears that the objective doctrine has to deny the possibility of
gaps in the law or advocate that judges should dismiss cases when they
face hard cases, in order to rebut the subjective doctrine. Both options go
against common sense. Some scholars in the objective camp refer to
                                                                             8
Ronald Dworkin’s “one right answer thesis” as their support. But, in
Law’s Empire, Dworkin retreated to the modest position that even in
hard cases each proponent, if she is serious at all, purports to argue that
                                  9
her view is objectively right. He admitted that there is no guarantee that
in a hard case many conflicting views converge into one that every


   龍一，刑事訴訟法，頁53（1958年）                   ）.
7  Id. at 54.
8  KŌJI SATO, KENPŌ [CONSTITUTIONAL LAW] 230 (1981)（佐藤幸治，憲法，頁230
  （1981年）     ）.
9 RONALD DWORKIN, LAW’S EMPIRE 81, 267 (1986). There is a stronger reason his
   theory cannot support the objective conscience doctrine. On this point, I will explain
   below at section VII.
Judges’ Conscience and Constitutional Reasoning                           5


rational person accepts. One cannot deny the possibility of gaps in the
law.

       Then, is the subjective conscience doctrine right after all? I do not
think so. Rather, I argue that the formulations of the issue under both
doctrines are profoundly misleading. As a result, both of them are
answering wrong questions.



II. Various meanings of morality

       The crucial point is that both doctrines ask whether the constitution
authorizes judges to consider their moral judgements in deciding judicial
cases. The implicit presupposition behind this questioning is that judges
may exercise only legal powers that the constitution (or the relevant laws)
confers upon them. This seems an obvious reversal of the relationship
between law and morality, which I will explain later.

       The “moral judgements” that the doctrines talk about are subjective
judgements, guaranteed under article 19, which may radically conflict
with each other. Every individual freely chooses and commits herself to
a worldview, a way of life, or a religious creed. If courts decide cases in
accordance with the personal judgements of individual judges, the result
would be a total negation of the rule of law. Even if subjective
judgements are considered only in hard cases, as the subjective
conscience doctrine claims, judicial conclusions would still differ widely
in accordance with which a judge one may encounter in the court.

       However, “morality” means more than various creeds or
worldviews each individual commits herself to. First, it may mean
6                                        《中研院法學期刊》第27期（2020年9月）



conventional morality widely accepted in the society—for example, “He
who does not work, never shall he eat” or “All learning and no thinking
makes you confused.” Morality in this sense means no more than the
fact that many people customarily think—or pretend to think—in the
             10
same way.         However, surely this is not what “all judges shall be
independent in exercise of.” Judges should not penalize those who learn
but not think, or those who live in ease thanks to the inheritance left by
               11
their parents.

     Second, morality may mean various creeds or worldviews that an
individual commits herself to. Christian and Zen Buddhist moralities are
examples. The freedom of choosing such creeds or worldviews are
guaranteed by article 19 of the constitution of Japan. However, as
indicated earlier, this is not what judges may consider while deciding
hard cases. A decision that is justifiable only from a specific religious
creed or worldview is not what the constitution expects a judge to deliver.

     The third meaning suggests a different route. People ponder over
how to live and what to do in light of practical reasons as human beings.



10 When Ernst-Wolfgang Böckenförde criticizes the “value-based grounding of the law”,
   he seems to have in mind as his target precisely this kind of “prevailing value
   consensus”, which is “subject to frequent changes and does not offer any inherent
   guarantee of being right” in a pluralistic society. See ERNST-WOLFGANG
   BÖCKENFÖRDE, CONSTITUTIONAL AND POLITICAL THEORY 234 (Miryam Künkler &
   Tine Stein eds., 2017).
11 Sometimes judges refer to conventional morality while interpreting the law. The
   Japanese Supreme Court refers to “the prevalent social idea” in deciding whether
   some material is obscene or not. See Saikō Saibansho [Sup. Ct.] Mar. 13, 1957,
   Showa 28 (a) no. 1713, 11 Saikō Saibansho keiji hanreishū [Keishū] 997 (Chatterley
   case), which held that a Japanese translation of Lady Chatterley’s Lover was obscene
   and fined the translator and publisher. However, this precedent has not been
   considered a case in which the judges exercised their conscience in referring to
   conventional morality.
Judges’ Conscience and Constitutional Reasoning                                         7


Such exercises and their conclusions are also called morality. As long as
you are a human being, you cannot abstain from such reasoning. You can
choose to be a Christian, Marxist, or Benthamite—and you can cease to
be so—and become a renegade. However, you cannot depart from
                        12
practical reasoning.         When you do that, you cease to be a human being.
What is relevant in considering the meaning of “conscience” under
                                                       13
article 64 is this third conception of morality.

      Both objective and subjective conscience doctrines presuppose that
judges should obey and apply objective laws. However, this
presupposition must include some morality warranting this obligation of
judges. The reason why judges should obey the law cannot be that it is
so prescribed in the law. That only brings about a vicious circle. If there
is a reason to obey the law, it must be a moral reason which you have to
seek outside the law. The idea that judges should decide disputes strictly
in accordance with the law itself must be based on some moral reason—
                                           14
and cannot be based on legal texts.             Therefore, the issue should not be
formulated as “whether the constitution allows judges to take into
morality account? ” but rather as “to what extent does morality demand
judges to obey objective laws, including the constitution? ”

      Since judges are also human beings, they cannot cease to exercise



12 I use practical reasoning in a wider sense here, as including judgements in particular
   instances.
13 The three senses of morality are not necessarily exclusionary each other. One
   religious creed may become a prevalent conventional morality in a given society. St
   Paul states: “If any would not work, neither should he eat” (II Thessalonians 3: 10). A
   conclusion of someone’s practical reasoning may also converge with conventional
   morality.
14 I follow Joseph Raz’s view here. See JOSEPH RAZ, BETWEEN AUTHORITY AND
   INTERPRETATION 183–84 (2009).
8                                       《中研院法學期刊》第27期（2020年9月）


                                                     15
practical reasoning during their office hours.            If they are content with
applying objective laws blindly without considering whether they are
morally justified in doing so, they will degenerate into automated
artificial intelligence and will not remain human beings anymore.



III. Kelsen’s legacy?

      Why do traditional doctrines think that if judges were not strictly
bound by the law in deciding disputes, they would be allowed to
consider their personal creeds or worldviews as morality in the second
sense described above? I do not have an answer. However, one possible
explanation may be that Japanese legal scholars were heavily influenced
                                 16
and deluded by Hans Kelsen.

      Kelsen argued that those who consider positive laws binding,
without exception, presuppose in their thoughts the basic norm that
everyone should obey the historically first constitution of the legal
          17
system.        This is a transcendental presupposition without which we
cannot coherently explain why people consider every positive law in the
legal system as binding (or valid). If you are a judge, it is natural that


15 Andrei Marmor says that: “A judicial role is not a vacation from moral
    responsibilities. ” See ANDREI MARMOR, PHILOSOPHY OF LAW 114 (2011).
16 The influence of Kelsen in Japan after World War II was conspicuous. Among others,
   the two leading constitutional scholars, Toshiyoshi Miyazawa at the University of
   Tokyo and Shirō Kiyomiya at the University of Tohoku (both advocated the
   “objective conscience” doctrine), were known to be Kelsenians. Kiyomiya translated
   Kensen’s Allgemeine Staatslehre (Springer 1925) into Japanese (KERUZEN [HANS
   KELSEN], IPPAN KOKKAGAKU [Allgemeine Staatslehre] (Kiyomiya Shirō trans.,
   Iwanami 1936) 1925（Hans Kelsen著，清宮四郎訳，一般国家学（1936年）                          ）.
17 HANS KELSEN, THE PURE THEORY OF LAW 201 (Max Knight trans. & ed., The
   Lawbook Exchange 2009) (1967).
Judges’ Conscience and Constitutional Reasoning                                          9


you presuppose this basic norm.

     Similarly, Kelsen also thought that every moral system also implied
that those that consider norms in the system as binding presuppose in
their thoughts the basic norm that entails that every norm in the system is
                     18
morally binding.          You can freely decide whether you presuppose such
a basic norm. And “it is paramount and cannot be emphasized enough to
understand that not only one moral order exists, but many different and
                             19                                                         20
even conflicting ones.”           Since Kelsen was a radical non-cognitivist,
it makes no sense for him to ask whether some conduct is objectively
good or bad, right or wrong. When you presuppose a basic norm, only
then can you judge whether some conduct is good or bad, right or wrong,
from that viewpoint.

     In my view, this is an extreme idea. It is more extreme than Thomas
Hobbes’ idea. While Hobbes says that in the state of nature there is no
standard to judge what is right or wrong, he still thinks that even in the
state of nature people are equipped with natural laws, that is, practical
reasons that guide them to construct a leviathan, a state that provides
                                                             21
them with preconditions for a peaceful social life.

     As described in Section 2, not all kinds of morality have such
radically subjective characteristics. Morality in the third sense is not one
that you can freely choose and, if you like, cease to adopt. It makes sense



18 Id. at 67–68.
19 Id. at 68.
20 See HANS KELSEN, WHAT IS JUSTICE?: JUSTICE, LAW, AND POLITICS IN THE MIRROR OF
   SCIENCE (1957).
21 THOMAS HOBBES, LEVIATHAN, at ch. 14–17 (Richard Tuck ed., Cambridge University
   Press 1996). It should be noted that for Hobbes natural laws are natural inclinations of
   human beings.
10                                      《中研院法學期刊》第27期（2020年9月）



to say that “it is legally prohibited in Shinjuku, Tokyo to smoke outdoors
except in the designated areas. However, you can choose not to take a
legal viewpoint.” On the other hand, if you say that “it is morally wrong
to smoke regardless of one’s surroundings. However, if you do not take a
moral viewpoint, you are still morally permitted to do so”, no one can
make sense of what you say. If you live as a human being at all, you
cannot depart from morality in this sense.

       If you were a radical non-cognitivist like Kelsen, you might not be
able to make sense of morality that applies to human beings in general.
If you are a judge, you are presumed to presuppose the basic norm of the
legal system, which warrants the binding force of every legal norm in it.
                                               22
If you deny the possibility of legal gaps,          then the objective conscience
doctrine is right. On the other hand, if you sincerely think that you
encounter a legal gap, what you can have recourse to in order to solve
the case is morality in the second sense, which you can freely choose
among various candidates. Then, the subjective conscience doctrine is
right.

       The conflict between morality and law as presupposed here by the
traditional doctrines is not a genuine conflict. For the conflict here is that
of between two basic norms, one legal and the other moral. In principle,
you can freely adopt one or the other. In either case, the conflict would
go away. Besides, it is quite doubtful whether judges should be
presumed to think that every positive law in the legal system is binding
and ought to be obeyed in every case.

       It makes sense to ask whether there is moral reason to obey and


22 Kelsen himself denied the possibility of legal gaps. See KELSEN, supra note 17, at
     245–50.
Judges’ Conscience and Constitutional Reasoning                                      11


apply a positive law; to think this is an essential pre-condition to
consider the relation between the law and morality seriously.



IV. Law and morality
                                                            23
      The law claims to have legitimate authority.               This does not mean
that the law coerces people by force. When the law requires you to do
something, you ought to do it not because you will be punished unless
you obey its order or because the law promises rewards for your doing
so. You ought to do it because the law says so. Why is it so? This is
because by obeying the law, people can better follow the courses of
action that they have reasons to take; or at least the law claims so.
Therefore, you should abstain from judging the courses of action that
you should choose, and just follow the law’s instructions. In other words,
the law functions as a reason for you which replaces your original
reasons based on which the law is issued. In obeying the law, you can
better conform to the reason that applies to you than try to follow the
reason directly. Thus, the law legitimately guides people to take specific
courses of action.

      Typical cases are traffic rules. When you drive a car, you usually do
not have a preference regarding the side of the road on which you should
drive. You should choose a side that every other driver in society
chooses. Every driver thinks this way. This is a co-ordination problem



23 Here, I draw heavily on Joseph Raz’s analysis of legal authority. See JOSEPH RAZ, THE
   MORALITY OF LAW, at ch. 2 & 3 (1986); JOSEPH RAZ, ETHICS IN THE PUBLIC DOMAIN,
   at ch. 10 (Revised ed. 2001) [hereinafter RAZ, ETHICS], explaining his normal
   justification thesis on practical authority.
12                                    《中研院法學期刊》第27期（2020年9月）



situation, which can be solved by gradually emerging conventions in
society. However, if the law tells you that you should drive on the left
side, then you have a sufficient reason to obey the rule. You do not have
to speculate on which side other people drive any more. Although you
are not morally obligated to drive on either side of the road, once the law
                                                               24
tells you to drive on the left side, you are obligated to do so.

       Many legal schemes for providing public goods have similar
characteristics. If enough people contribute to a scheme, there is reason
for you also to contribute. If not, then your contribution to the scheme is
of no use for public interest or for your personal interest, and it is
                                            25
irrational for you to insist on contributing.

       On some issues, the government (or experts to whom the
government delegates the power of decision-making) has better
knowledge than ordinary people: some areas where this operates include,
for example, identifying medicines that should be permitted to be sold
by drug stores or identifying people who are qualified to work as
attorneys, etc. In such cases too, people have reasons to consider the law
as possessing legitimate authority and abstain from autonomously
judging how to behave, though you should not lightly presume that the
government always has better knowledge than ordinary people on many
issues.

       When the law works as a legitimate authority, it guides people’s
conduct successfully. In order to perform that role effectively, the law
should be equipped with several characteristics: legal rules should be


24 This is what Thomas Aquinas called determinatio (Thomas Aquinas, 2-1 Summa
     Theologiae, q. 95 a. 2.).
25 See RICHARD TUCK, FREE RIDING (2008).
Judges’ Conscience and Constitutional Reasoning                                        13


public (promulgated), clear, general, stable, consistent with each other,
not retrospective, and implemented faithfully by every state organ. When
the requirements are satisfied sufficiently—in this imperfect world, no
legal system satisfies the requirements completely—it is said that the
                           26
rule of law is realized.

      For the law to guide people’s conduct (and for the people to follow
the law and its instructions), another condition is necessary: that we can
tell what are the legal rules are and what they are not. In other words,
with the help of the rule of recognition, we can distinguish between the
rules of a given legal system and other norms. Thus, there is an intimate
nexus between the concepts of legal authority, the rule of law, and the
rule of recognition.

      In summary, laws are convenient instruments for people to dispense
with autonomous practical reasoning. In obeying the law, you can cut
your practical reasoning short and skip to the conclusion, which is what
you should do according to the reasons applying to you anyway; or so
the law claims. The law’s claim to possess legitimate authority
presupposes that there are moral reasons to accept its claim. Therefore,
when there is sufficient reason for you to not obey the law’s
instructions—for example, your state is a “failed state”, failing to co-
ordinate people’s courses of action, or when applied to a given case the
law entails obvious immoral consequences—you should disregard the
law’s claim and follow your own practical reasoning. In other words,

26 Whether these characteristics are required from rules or their sources—typically legal
   texts—is difficult to answer. Perhaps, we aspire, first, that legal texts are equipped
   with these characteristics, and second, that legal rules that are practically effective
   should not deviate from the texts. If there is a huge discrepancy between legal texts
   and implemented laws, we may say that the laws are not public, and therefore, that the
   rule of law is not realized.
14                                      《中研院法學期刊》第27期（2020年9月）



you stop using convenient instruments and return to your original
position. That is, you think of what to do by yourself.



V. A digression on Kelsen’s theory on legal reasoning

     A digression on Kelsen’s theory on legal reasoning may help us
understand the relationship between law and morality. In his later years,
Kelsen argued that the truth of legal statements cannot be established by
                                                       27
referring to already established legal statements.

     According to Kelsen, in the following example, even if the truth of
the legal statement (a) is established, we cannot deduce from (a) with the
factual statement (b) that the statement (c) is true. In other words, we
cannot deduce the validity (existence) of the legal norm (c) describes
logically from the valid norm (a) describes.

     (a) Every thief should be punished by imprisonment.
     (b) Jimmy is a thief.
     (c) Jimmy should be punished by imprisonment.

     There is a grain of truth in this argument. Kelsen does not deny that
courts usually try to justify their decisions by referring to already
                               28
established legal norms.            However, his point is, I think, that
justification offered by a court is rarely a complete reason to establish
the validity of its decision. Even if it is established that Jimmy did


27 HANS KELSEN, ESSAYS IN LEGAL AND MORAL PHILOSOPHY 240 (Ota Weinberger ed.,
   Peter Heath trans., D. Reidel publishing 1973) [hereinafter KELSEN, ESSAYS]; HANS
   KELSEN, GENERAL THEORY OF NORMS 237–39 (Michael Hartney trans., Clarendon
   Press 1991).
28 KELSEN, ESSAYS, supra note 27, at 260.
Judges’ Conscience and Constitutional Reasoning                                        15


indeed steal Mary’s book, there might be some circumstances that
legitimized his action, or that his action is excusable because of his
mental state. According to Kelsen, every legal norm is created by an act
of will. Therefore, only when a court delivers its decision, an
authoritative concrete legal norm, a judicial decision, is created and the
legal statement describing the decision becomes true. While there is still
room for doubt about the justifiability of the decision, it acquires the
force of res judicata and no one can dispute or overturn it anymore. The
parties should regard it as an established legal norm.

     However, in some cases, a court may provide a simple and
seemingly complete reason justifying its decision, and the statement
describing it may seem true before the court delivers its decision. In such
cases too, Kelsen may insist that because every judicial decision is a
creation of the act of will, the statement describing it becomes true only
after the court delivers that decision. However, when every rational
person agrees on the content of the appropriate conclusion, insisting on
the need for the court’s decision seems redundant and goes against
common sense. If the truth of a legal statement in such cases cannot be
sufficiently supported by the law before the judicial decision is delivered,
how can Kelsen deduce the conclusion that the court is accorded the
authority to deliver a judicial decision at all? Does the statement that the
court has such authority become true only after the court creates a
corresponding power-conferring norm by its decision? This is evidently
                               29
vicious self-authorisation.



29 I suspect that when Joseph Raz says that: “the authority of the courts to make
   decisions validating delegated legislation … depends on the very chain of reasoning
   that Kelsen is committed to reject” in RAZ, ETHICS, supra note 23, at 264, this is what
   he means.
16                                             《中研院法學期刊》第27期（2020年9月）



      Though judges do not invariably provide simple and seemingly
complete reasons justifying their decisions—if they always do so, do we
need a doctrine of res judicata? —Kelsen seems extreme in denying
such possibilities; although in such cases too, the relationship between
the legal premises that the judge explicitly refers to and the conclusion
                                                                                      30
he delivers may not be characterized as a mere “logical” reasoning.                        In
other words, there must be easy and hard cases. In easy cases, legal
reasoning leading to judicial decisions appears to be independent of non-
legal reasons, including moral ones. The law works perfectly as a tool to
skip practical reasoning; a judge can persuasively “deduce” a conclusion
by referring only to established legal norms and judicial facts.

      Judges must refer to non-legal and moral considerations to justify
their decisions in not a few cases. Whether a case is easy or hard
depends on moral considerations surrounding legal reasoning that is
necessary to decide the case. In easy cases, moral considerations are
latent; in order to reach a sufficiently justified decision, the court does
not have to refer to them. However, they are still there, except that they
                                          31
are just dormant and undetected.               Legal reasoning is always soaked in


30 This is because, as explained in the text below, logical inference is just one element in
   the reasoning; legal reasoning is not a one-way exercise from the premises to the
   conclusion. The conclusion should also be supported by other, substantive and moral
   reasons, in order to be a sufficiently just one.
31 Although the criminal code provides various mitigating clauses, sometimes judges
   still must refer to moral considerations in order to avoid unjust decisions entailed by
   the code. In its ruling dated 4 April 1973, the Supreme Court of Japan had to make
   recourse to the proportionality principle, which was prescribed by article 14, the equal
   protection clause, in order to invalidate Article 200 of the criminal code that stipulated
   that patricide and matricide should be punished with death penalty or imprisonment
   for life. The Court held that the punishment was disproportionately severe, since
   patricide or matricide could be committed under extraordinary circumstances. In this
   case, the accused had been sexually abused by her father since her childhood and was
   cornered to kill him as he tried to forcibly confine her to obstruct her marriage to her
Judges’ Conscience and Constitutional Reasoning                                    17


                   32
moral reasoning.

     Kelsen tried to exclude all moral considerations from legal
reasoning. Legal reasoning must be pure, he thought. From his non-
cognitivist view, to take into account moral considerations would make
legal systems and legal reasoning radically unstable. It would make it
impossible to secure a legal domain working autonomously, purified
from savagely conflicting rival ideologies in his age. This line of
thinking might lead him to create his ingenious theory on legal reasoning,
which makes him unable to distinguish between easy and hard cases.
Kelsen’s observation that judicial decisions cannot be reduced to mere
logical inferences from the already existing law is right. However, this
conclusion can be explained adequately only when we admit that judicial
decisions should be supported by moral considerations as well.



VI. Authority of the constitution

     Whether the constitution is a law (or a cluster of laws) is a delicate
question. Here I assume that the constitution is a system of norms,
written, entrenched, and interpreted by various state organs, typically by
the constitutional court. The constitution is usually composed of two
parts: one that organizes the system of state organs, the other that
declares basic rights guaranteed to the people. The first part obviously


   boyfriend (Saikō Saibansho [Sup. Ct.] Apr. 4, 1973, Showa 45 (a) no. 1310, 27 Saikō
   Saibansho keiji hanreishū [Keishū] 265).
32 This immersion of legal reasoning into moral reasoning may disfigure judicial
   reasoning when the surrounding “moral reasoning” degenerates to, for example, an
   extremely authoritarian one. Judges cannot be entirely immune from their social and
   political atmosphere.
18                                       《中研院法學期刊》第27期（2020年9月）



regulates the conduct of state organs, including the people as a voting
body. It guides the addressees’ conduct. Therefore, this part is to claim
that its norms are laws and should be regarded as having legitimate
authorities.

     Here, we should distinguish between constitutional texts and
                                              33
practices. As many scholars point out,             there is no sufficient reason to
assume that those who established the constitutional code were equipped
with expertise that ordinary people lack, despite the American reverence
for the founding fathers or the Rousseauian myth of “lawgiver
                34
(législateur).”      If norms organising and regulating state organs are laws,
it is not because the founding fathers had better knowledge on
constitutional matters. Even if they did have better knowledge, since the
                                                                                35
constitution is entrenched and expected to last for long years,                      its
effectiveness would soon lapse. Therefore, if these constitutional norms
should be considered as possessing legitimate authority, it is because
they successfully co-ordinate people’s actions at the constitutional
      36
level.     However, if this is so, then when there is a discrepancy between
constitutional texts and practices, people have reason to obey not the



33 See, e.g., RAZ, supra note 14, at 341.
34 Cf. Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Of the Social Contract, Book II, in THE SOCIAL
   CONTRACT AND OTHER LATER POLITICAL WRITINGS 57, 68–72 (Victor Gourevitch ed.,
   1997). The Rousseauian lawgiver confers upon people their fundamental laws, which
   transform the nature of the people and make them seek public welfare. He induces
   them to accept the fundamental laws with help of the divine myth, because vulgar
   people cannot understand the law-giver’s sublime reason. “At the origin of nations,
   religion serves as the instrument of politics”, Rousseau says.
35 The average lifespan of constitutions in the world since the French revolution is 19
   years. See ZACHARY ELKINS, TOM GINSBURG & JAMES MELTON, THE ENDURANCE OF
   NATIONAL CONSTITUTIONS (2009). However, a constitution lasting for just 19 years is
   not deemed as a successful constitution.
36 RAZ, supra note 14, at 348–49.
Judges’ Conscience and Constitutional Reasoning                               19


texts but practices, because co-ordination problems are solved by actual
          37
practices.

     As to constitutional clauses declaring basic rights, there is a dispute
on whether they are laws incorporating moral principles: the dispute
                                                        38
between the inclusionary and exclusionary theses.            While this is not an
appropriate place to discuss the dispute, I am inclined to adopt the so-
called exclusionary thesis. Even if we assume that these clauses
“incorporate” moral principles into the legal system, the addressees
should still ponder upon and judge by themselves as to what conduct is
congruent with these principles; because they are moral principles. In
other words, these “incorporated” moral principles cannot pre-empt
people’s autonomous practical reasoning; and therefore, cannot work as
             39
authorities.      They are not able to say: “you should do it because we say
so.” What they can tell people is just to: “ponder upon and judge by
yourself what a moral conduct is for you in a given situation.”

     However, when the court interprets a basic right clause and delivers
a norm that is reasonably workable as a guidance for state organs, then,
we may say that a law has emerged, that is, an authoritative
constitutional law. Such products of judicial interpretations become
elements of the constitution as far as they are policed, protected, and
polished by the constitutional court. Here again, practices, not texts,
generate constitutional laws.

     As many scholars point out, the constitution is not the rule of



37 Cf. RAZ, supra note 14, at 350.
38 Cf. JULES COLEMAN ED., HART’S POSTSCRIPT: ESSAYS ON THE POSTSCRIPT TO THE
   CONCEPT OF LAW (2001).
39 Scott Shapiro, On Hart’s Way Out, 4 LEGAL THEORY 469, 469–507 (1998).
20                                        《中研院法學期刊》第27期（2020年9月）



recognition. The rule of recognition exists only as customary practices
shared among law-applying public officials including, in particular,
judges. It can neither be written into a legal text, nor be intentionally
changed as the constitutional code sometimes is. If the rule of
recognition were written into a legal text, we would need a higher rule of
recognition in order to identify that text as a positive law, which would
                      40
be a contradiction.        This means that the written rule is not the rule of
                        41
recognition after all.



VII. A digression on Dworkin’s interpretive theory

      Laws are convenient instruments for people to dispense with
autonomous practical reasoning. Why they work as such instruments and
to what extent they successfully do so can be explained by moral
considerations. There is an intimate relationship between the law and
morality. If this is so, it appears to be possible to deny the distinction
between the law and morality. Ronald Dworkin took this step. I will state
very briefly why I refuse to adopt the bold interpretive theory he
developed in Law’s Empire.

      First, while he sometimes appears to deny the existence of the rule
of recognition, this attitude cannot be taken at face value. Not only
professional lawyers but ordinary citizens know the distinction between
                                            42
positive laws and moral norms.                   According to his theory, the


40 JOHN GARDNER, LAW AS A LEAP OF FAITH 102 (2012).
41 On the other hand, the rules of change and adjudication can be, at least partially,
   written into codes or statutes. See, for example, article 41 (the rule of change) and
   article 76 (the rule of adjudication) of the constitution of Japan.
42 For a similar, but more subtle, criticism of Dworkin’s view, see MARMOR, supra note
Judges’ Conscience and Constitutional Reasoning                                       21


interpretation of social practices including the law starts from the “pre-
interpretive stage” where rules and standards are “identified.” In the
second “interpretive stage”, an interpreter should construct an argument
justifying the identified rules and standards; and the justification need
not fit every aspect of the standing practices, but should sufficiently fit
the main elements constituting them: “enough for the interpreter to be
                                                                43
able to see himself as interpreting that practice.”                  I think that the
interpreter that Dworkin describes cannot identify the rules and
standards, or construct a justification fitting them, without the help of the
rule of recognition. His interpretive theory necessarily presupposes the
                              44
existence of the rule.             However, I suspect that this point is not very
significant for Dworkin after all, because, as we shall see, his core
contention is do deny the authority of positive laws.

      Second, he seems to suggest that every understanding of law is an
                   45
interpretation.         This cannot be taken at face value, either. As Andrei
                         46
Marmor explains,              an interpretation of a statement produces only
another statement, which must also be interpreted in order to understand
its meaning, but that interpretation too produces only another statement.
Such an exercise entails infinite regress. We will not be able to
understand the meaning of a legal text for ever. Interpretation is, as



   15, at 75–76.
43 DWORKIN, supra note 9, at 65–66.
44 However, I cannot but admit that the rule of recognition has enigmatic aspects. It
   consists of customary practices, is rarely stated explicitly, cannot be written into a
   legal text, and still imposes duty on law-applying officials. It guides them.
45 Michel Troper also subscribes to this thesis. On this point, see Yasuo Hasebe, The
   Rule of Law and Its Predicament, 17 RATIO JURIS 489, 489–500 (2004).
46 ANDREI MARMOR, INTERPRETATION AND LEGAL THEORY, at ch. 2 & 146–54 (1992).
   See also the comments on the argument in TIMOTHY ENDICOTT, VAGUENESS IN LAW
   168–78 (2000).
22                                   《中研院法學期刊》第27期（2020年9月）



Marmor points out, to be conceived as exceptional exercise parasitic to
the ordinary understanding of texts, which need not have recourse to
interpretation.

     Finally, at the very end of Law’s Empire, Dworkin advocates the
“protestant attitude” towards the law, which demands that every citizen
should imagine “what his society’s public commitments to principle are,
                                                                47
and what these commitments require in new circumstances.”            Dworkin
seems to require that every citizen should be responsible for constructing
a theory which sufficiently fits the prevailing statutes and precedents and
adequately justifies them, and then for extrapolating answers to
particular cases from that theory. Practically, this thesis means that the
distinction between easy and hard cases evaporates for every citizen,
because ultimately, a conclusion for every legal question depends on his
justifying theory of the law as a whole. In other words, the authority of
law is totally negated. Every legal question is a moral question, and each
citizen should autonomously think and decide upon its conclusion,
which is surely a protestant attitude. I think that this thesis is too
demanding for ordinary citizens as well as for ordinary judges. What
they want is rather a convenient instrument to cut their practical
reasonings short.

     The interpretive steps his imagined judge Hercules takes in
deciding hard cases may be an accurate description that any judge facing
a hard case may purport to do. How a case should be decided ultimately
depends on moral considerations supporting the law. However, as H.L.A.
Hart points out, in such a hard case, “[i]t will not matter for any practical
purpose whether the judge is making law in accordance with morality”


47 DWORKIN, supra note 9, at 413.
Judges’ Conscience and Constitutional Reasoning                                  23


                                                                                 48
or “guided by his moral judgement as to what already existing law is.”
I suspect that Dworkin would not be shaken by such a remark at all,
because his point is nothing but to deny the authority of the law.



VIII. Where does judges’ conscience lead us?

     The morality that a judge has recourse to when he faces a hard case
is not his personal conviction that may radically conflict with other
individuals’ convictions. He should have recourse to the morality that he
sincerely believes to be congruent with the current legal system as a
whole; the morality that can be widely shared among judges in society.

     In the case of Japan, one of its main components is the morality of
liberal constitutionalism, which purports to realize a society where
individuals holding radically conflicting, even incommensurable
worldviews are still treated fairly and can lead civilized and autonomous
      49
lives.     The fact that individual freedom to conscience is guaranteed in
itself shows that this is the morality that every judge should take into
account when he doubts whether a conclusion seemingly entailed from
the established law is congruent with “judges’ conscience.” We do not
live in the Weimar republic. Judges need not retreat to the enclave of
“pure legal reasoning” in order to avoid being dragged into a ferocious
ideological warfare. When judges exercise practical reasoning, they
usually claim that they are applying basic rights clauses or some general


48 H.L.A. HART, THE CONCEPT OF LAW 254 (3d ed. 2012). For a similar observation, see
   RAZ, ETHICS, supra note 23, at 225.
49 See, e.g., Yasuo Hasebe & Cesare Penelli, Constitutions, in ROUTLEDGE HANDBOOK
   OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 9, 9–19 (Mark Tushnet, Thomas Fleiner & Cheryl Saunders
   eds., 2013).
24                                        《中研院法學期刊》第27期（2020年9月）



legal clauses under civil or criminal law. However, what they are
carrying out is moral reasoning and not mere logical inferences from the
already existing laws.

     Legal rules are convenient instruments to cut practical reasoning
                                         50
short. As Aristotle stated long ago:

     What makes for the puzzle is that what is equitable is just, but not what is
     legally just—rather a correction of it. The reason is that all law is universal,
     and there are some things about which one cannot speak correctly in universal
     terms. In those areas, then, in which it is necessary to make universal
     statements but not possible to do so correctly, the law takes account of what
     happens more often, though it is not unaware that it can be in error. And it is
     no less correct for doing this; for the error is attributable not to the law, nor to
     the law-giver, but to the nature of the case, since the subject-matter of action is
     like this in its essence.

                                                          51
     Before Aristotle, Plato stated the following:

     [L]egislation can never issue perfect instructions which precisely encompass
     everyone’s best interests and guarantee fair play for everyone at once. People
     and situations differ, and human affairs are characterized by an almost
     permanent state of instability. It is therefore impossible to devise, for any given
     situation, a simple rule which will apply to everyone for ever.

     The whole purpose of legal reasoning by judges is to seek
substantively just conclusions. Laws are expected to work as instruments
for that purpose. For laws to do so, they must satisfy the requirements of
the rule of law. However, laws that satisfy them, that are public, clear,


50 ARISTOTLE, NICOMACHEAN ETHICS 100 [1137b] (Roger Crisp ed., 2000).
51 PLATO, STATESMAN 58–59 [294b] (Julia Annas & Robin Waterfield eds., 1995).
Judges’ Conscience and Constitutional Reasoning                                          25


general, consistent with each other, not retroactive, may bring about
unjust conclusions when they are applied to concrete cases. Laws
sometimes malfunction as instruments.

     In such cases, judges should return to their original position. They
have to exercise their own practical reason. Constitutional texts, in
particular, its basic rights clauses, indicate that judges are permitted to
                                                             52
exclude the authority of the law in such cases.                   Thus, the “objective
conscience” doctrine, which reduces the judges’ conscience to objective
laws cannot be right. Neither can Dworkin’s theory be of help to this
doctrine, as his position is far apart from its view that judges are strictly
bound by positive laws. However, the morality that judges should seek
recourse to is not each judge’s personal worldview. Therefore, the
“subjective conscience” doctrine is also wrong. The right answer should
be sought in the middle of both extreme positions.




52 The Kelsenian centralized constitutional court does not perform the constitutional
   exclusion of the authority of the law on its own in solving judicial cases, because it
   does not preside over the litigation itself. When ordinary courts detect malfunctioning
   of legal rules and refer constitutional issues to the constitutional court, we may say
   that the constitutional exclusion is carried out by a collaboration between ordinary
   courts and the constitutional court. The same observation applies when the
   constitutional court invalidates legal rules and then the ordinary courts decide cases in
   accordance with its decisions. I understand that the Constitutional Court in Taiwan is
   equipped with these “concrete review” and “individual complaint” powers. See
   JIUNN-RONG YEH, THE CONSTITUTION OF TAIWAN: A CONTEXTUAL ANALYSIS 163–64
   (2016); Jiunn-rong Yeh & Wen-Chen Chang, An Evolving Court with Changing
   Functions: The Constitutional Court and Judicial Review in Taiwan, in
   CONSTITUTIONAL COURTS IN ASIA: A COMPARATIVE PERSPECTIVE 110, 114–15 (Albert
   H.Y. Chen & Andrew Harding eds., 2018).
26                                《中研院法學期刊》第27期（2020年9月）




                             Reference

1. English

Aristotle. 2000. Nicomachean Ethics, edited by Roger Crisp.
     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Berman, Harold. 2003. Law and Revolution II: The Impact of the
     Protestant Reformations on the Western Legal Tradition.
     Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Böckenförde, Ernst-Wolfgang. 2017. Constitutional and Political Theory,
     edited by Miryam Künkler and Tine Stein. Oxford: Oxford
     University Press.
Coleman, Jules, ed. 2001. Hart’s Postscript: Essays on the Postscript to
     the Concept of Law. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dworkin, Ronald. 1986. Law’s Empire. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
     University Press.
Elkins, Zachary, Tom Ginsburg, and James Melton. 2009. The
     Endurance of National Constitutions. Cambridge: Cambridge
     University Press.
Endicott, Timothy. 2000. Vagueness in Law. Oxford: Oxford University
     Press.
Gardner, John. 2012. Law as a Leap of Faith. Oxford: Oxford University
     Press.
Hart, H.L.A. 2012. The Concept of Law. 3d ed. Oxford: Oxford
     University Press.
Hasebe, Yasuo. 2004. The Rule of Law and Its Predicament. Ratio Juris
     17:489–500.
Hasebe, Yasuo, and Cesare Penelli. 2013. Constitutions. Pp. 9–19 in
     Routledge Handbook of Constitutional Law, edited by Mark
Judges’ Conscience and Constitutional Reasoning                         27


     Tushnet, Thomas Fleiner, and Cheryl Saunders. Abingdon-on-
     Thames: Routledge.
Hobbes, Thomas. 1996. Leviathan, edited by Richard Tuck. Cambridge:
     Cambridge University Press.
Kelsen, Hans. 1957. What Is Justice?: Justice, Law, and Politics in the
     Mirror of Science. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
─. 1973. Essays in Legal and Moral Philosophy, edited by Ota
     Weinberger, translated by Peter Heath. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
─. 1991. General Theory of Norms, translated by Michael Hartney.
     Gloucestershire: Clarendon Press.
─. 2009 (1967). The Pure Theory of Law, translated and edited by
     Max Knight. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Marmor, Andrei. 1992. Interpretation and Legal Theory. Gloucestershire:
 Clarendon Press.
─. 2011. Philosophy of Law. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
     Press.
Plato. 1995. Statesman, edited by Julia Annas and Robin Waterfield.
     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Raz, Joseph. 1986. The Morality of Law. Gloucestershire: Clarendon
     Press.
─.            2001.   Ethics   in   the    Public   Domain.   Revised   ed.
     Gloucestershire: Clarendon Press.
─. 2009. Between Authority and Interpretation. Oxford: Oxford
     University Press.
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques. 1997. Of the Social Contract, Book II. Pp. 57–
     81 in The Social Contract and Other Later Political Writings,
     edited by Victor Gourevitch. Cambridge: Cambridge University
     Press.
Shapiro, Scott. 1998. On Hart’s Way Out. Legal Theory 4:469–507.
28                                《中研院法學期刊》第27期（2020年9月）



Tuck, Richard. 2008. Free Riding. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
     Press.
Worthington, Sarah. 2003. Equity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Yeh, Jiunn-rong. 2016. The Constitution of Taiwan: A Contextual
     Analysis. Oxford: Hart Publishing.
Yeh, Jiunn-rong, and Wen-Chen Chang. 2018. An Evolving Court with
     Changing Functions: The Constitutional Court and Judicial Review
     in Taiwan. Pp. 110–140 in Constitutional Courts in Asia: A
     Comparative Perspective, edited by Albert H.Y. Chen and Andrew
     Harding. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

2. Japanese

Kaneko, Hajime, and Morio Takeshita. 1999. Saibanhō [The Laws
     Concerning the Administration of Justice]. 4th ed. Tokyo: Yuhikaku.
     (兼子一、竹下守夫（1999）
                   ，裁判法，4版，東京：有斐閣。)
Kiyomiya, Shirō. 1979. Kenpō I [Constitutional Law I]. 3d ed. Tokyo:
     Yurikaku.（清宮四郎（1979）
                        ，憲法I，3版，東京：有斐閣。)
Keruzen. 1936. Ippan Kokkagaku, translated by Kiyomiya Shirō. Tokyo:
     Iwanami. [Kelsen, Hans (1925), Allgemeine Staatslehre, Berlin:
     Springer.]（Hans Kelsen著，清宮四郎訳（1936），一般国家
     学，東京：岩波書店。）
Sato, Kōji. 1981. Kenpō [Constitutional Law]. Tokyo: Seirin Shoin.（佐
     藤幸治（1981）
             ，憲法，東京：青林書院。）
Toshiyoshi, Miyazawa. 1978. Nihonkoku-Kenpō [The Constitution of
     Japan]. Revised ed. Tokyo: Nihon-Hyoron-Sha. （ 宮 沢 俊 義
     （1978）
          ，全訂日本国憲法，改訂版，東京：日本評論社。）
Hirano, Ryuichi. 1958. Keiji Soshō-hō [Code of Criminal Procedure].
     Tokyo: Yuhikaku.（平野龍一（1958），刑事訴訟法，東京：有
     斐閣。）
