                         A World of Ideas
                                  Cass R. Sunstein*



     Over the last decades, I have been fortunate enough to do a great deal of
traveling and speaking, often focusing on human rights, democracy, freedom,
freedom of speech, extremism, and behavioral economics. I cannot recall a
more inspiring and productive visit than my trip to Institutum Iurisprudentiae,
Academia Sinica (IIAS) in 2015, when I was truly honored to deliver the Lei
Chen Memorial Lectures on Democracy and Human Rights. At IIAS, there is a
unique combination of creativity, brilliance, originality, and human kindness.
   Much of that visit was purely academic. The first of my Lei Chen
Memorial Lectures explored extremism and freedom of speech ─ a topic that
was lively and relevant in 2015, and that is even more lively and relevant
today. The second of the Lectures discussed deliberative democracy. The
audience on both occasions were exceptionally engaged, emphasizing the
importance of freedom of speech to many social goals (including economic
growth) and also the risk of extremism, which often grows when like-minded
people speak and listen mostly to one another, or when some people are
silenced and others are given a large megaphone.
     A deliberative democracy helps to counteract extremism. It delivers a
number of other goods as well. Deliberative democracy prizes reflection and
reason-giving, and thus combats arbitrariness, autocracy, and foolishness —
the deliberation part. It also prizes accountability to the people, and thus insists


*
   Robert Walmsley University Professor, Harvard University.
Online: http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/51817012.pdf;
        http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/62917012.pdf (Chinese version).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
304 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


on the grant of power to the people ─ the democracy part. (It was
extraordinary to give my lecture on deliberative democracy in a cultural
heritage, a dancing house whose owner, I was informed, had been a political
prisoner.) The grace, kindness, and wisdom of the IIAS faculty and students on
those occasions were unforgettable. They showed that even though different
challenges manifest themselves in different ways in different countries, we are
all human beings, and what unifies human beings is far more important than
what separates them.
    I was quite excited to be asked to give some additional lectures in
Academia Sinica, one on behavioral law and economics, and another on
autonomy and freedom of choice. In 2015, the area of behavioral law and
economics was relatively young (it still is), and it was known mostly to
specialists; for this topic, I had some trepidation, thinking the audience would
be unfamiliar with it. I was entirely wrong. The audience at Academia Sinica
was astoundingly well-informed. The questions were brilliant, raising issues
and problems at the frontiers of international thinking. Focusing on the nature
and limits of human rationality and on altruism, and the implications of the
answers for policy and law, members of the audience pushed toward and even
past the boundaries of existing understandings. They raised wonderful issues
and made highly original points about “nudging” (a set of behaviorally
informed tools designed to help people to make better choices).
    Ever since that time, I have often thought about those superb questions,
which have informed and improved my recent work. And in the midst of the
many health, safety, and other challenges that nations face, it has seemed to
me, from afar, that Taiwan has used behavioral economics, and behavioral
sciences, to excellent effect, and with some excellent results, not least in
responding to the COVID-19 pandemic.
    During the trip, I was greatly honored to meet with President Ma Ying-
Jeou, with justices of the Constitutional Court, and with the then-opposition
leader, Ms. Tsai Ing-Wen (now of course the current president). With both the
                                                           A World of Ideas   305


former and the current president, I discussed lessons learned during my time in
the White House with President Barack Obama, exploring the uses and limits
of regulation, the importance of analyzing costs and benefits, and also the uses
of “nudges” to promote health and safety.
    Surprising but true: At the time, I was also thinking a great deal about Star
Wars (I did a book on that topic, with reference to constitutional law and
democracy), and I was excited to see a large number of books about Star Wars,
and posters too, at the Eslite Bookstore. The spirit at the Bookstore ─ a
combination of wit, humor, intense curiosity, an appetite for learning, and
sheer delight in life ─ stays with me today.
    It is truly an honor to write these words, as we commemorate the 10th
anniversary of the IIAS, and congratulate the IIAS on its remarkable
achievements. My visit was six full years ago, but it feels as it were just last
week, even yesterday. I will forever be grateful to IIAS and my extraordinary
hosts ─ my lifelong friends ─ for their generosity throughout. And I hope
to be fortunate enough to return, well before the 20th anniversary.
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
306 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY
