            An Encounter with Taiwan
                in Transformation
                                    Ruti G. Teitel*



     I am grateful for this opportunity to recognize the ground breaking
research work of Academica Sinica on issues of justice both in Taiwan and
more globally. It is a privilege to reflect back with you to pre-pandemic times
and to what was a truly exceptional moment for the country and for myself.
This was so for a number of reasons, personal to political.
     My own awareness of the Academic Sinica’s work began with my
exchanges with the organizers of a lecture invitation; in conjunction together
with the Asian Human Rights Court Simulation. Yet, at the time of the
invitation, whatever I knew of Taiwan, and its vexed political history, was
through my colleague renown New Haven School Professor of International
Law Lung-Chu Chen who had been a longtime advocate of Taiwanese
sovereignty and equal statehood.
     This would change rapidly — first for personal reasons because that same
summer 2019, my nephew Gideon Teitel who had an abiding interest in the
region had accepted a fellowship as Huayu Enrichment Scholar and raved
about the place and its people.
     The other is that the invitation to visit the summer of 2019 would prove to
come on the heels of the creation of the Transitional Justice Commission
significant political events in the country, created the space for new

*
   Ernst C. Stiefel Professor of Comparative Law, New York Law School.
Online: http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/62027012.pdf;
        http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/62127012.pdf (Chinese version).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
312 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


opportunities for long delayed transitional justice response to periods of
predecessor authoritarian and repressive rule.
     Hence the visit would involve the full range of transitional justice-related
activities from stimulating exchanges with extraordinary research scholars at
the Academia Sinica, many of whom were doing probing work on normative
questions concerning Taiwan’s transitional justice often in comparative
analysis with other historical and contemporary instances of political
transformation, to productive discussions following my Maestro Lecture which
was on a regional reframing of political transition and related developments in
the conception of transitional justice. There was also in tandem the Asian
Human Rights Court Simulation with an eye to change in the region and an
articulated concern for human rights that in the last two years given regional
developments have become all the more timely. Two other happenings mad
visit experience remarkable. One was a visit to Taiwan’s transitional justice
commission where I was able to hear in real time how the country was
addressing terms of reckoning with its past, with an eye to its future. The other
was a bookstore event at Linking Bookhouse, where my publisher in Taiwan
for my first book TRANSITIONAL JUSTICE1 was holding a readers-meet-author
event with a book panel of scholars including Dr. Cheng-Yi Huang of the
Institutum Iurisprudentiae, Academia Sinica. To my surprise, though convened
on a hot summer Saturday night this book event attracted a standing room only
audience-largely young college age.
     The book event at Linking Bookhouse as well as the high caliber of
research at the academia made me excited for Taiwan’s future. I remember in
particular an exchange in the Q&A discussion at the bookstore, echoing similar
questions I’d gotten throughout the week, where a student asked me for advice
about what to do. He asked: “What knowledge about the past do we need to
find?” My answer was that it was not for me to say but that this inquiry was


1
    RUTI G. TEITEL, TRANSITIONAL JUSTICE, 2000.
                                An Encounter with Taiwan in Transformation 313


political and contingent and would come from current civil society and would
depend on its commitment to political transformation. In a follow up, the
student then went on to elaborate: “It is the knowledge we need to understand
how we got here and where we are going.”




                              References
Teitel, G. Ruti. 2000. Transitional Justice. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
314 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY
