    Digital Development and Privacy:
     Is There a Way to Alleviate the
            Uneasy Tension?
                                                          *




                            Wen-Tsong Chiou**



                                   Contents

    I. Digital Development: From a          B. Model 2: De-identification
        Technology-Oriented Project to         Approach
        the Building of a Data-Driven       C. Yet Another Paradigm Shift:
        World                                  Empowerment Approach
    II. Making Government-Collected      III. Government Making Use of Data
        Data Available for Value-Added        Collected by Private Sector
        Secondary Uses                   IV. Government Engaged in Creating
       A. Model 1: Autonomy-based             More Data for Future Uses
          Approach                       V. Conclusion




*
   本文曾發表於2021法務部司法官學院線上國際研討會（2021年7月6日）。
   中央研究院法律學研究所於2004年設立籌備處起，即以「科技發展與法律規範」作為
   其六大研究方向之一，而資訊法原即為「科技發展與法律規範」之研究範疇。隨著近
   年來資訊技術與資料科學的急速演進與發展，數位革命對社會帶來的衝擊既深且廣，
   更具有相當的急迫性。法律所於2016年底開始籌劃設立資訊法中心，並於2019年7月
   正式成立運作。資訊法中心一方面藉由與資訊科技及資料科學界的跨領域、跨學門合
   作對話，期能於資訊法研究的上游，在科學技術發展之始，即參與其目標與價值之論
   辯與設定；另一方面則藉由將傳統資訊法學術研究成果進一步轉譯為更貼近現實的政
   策語言，期能在資訊法研究的下游，更具體與實際地影響相關法政策之制訂與執行。
   時值法律所成立十週年之際，僅以數位發展與隱私一文誌之。
**
   Research Professor and Director of Information Law Center, Institutum
   Iurisprudentiae, Academia Sinica.
Online: http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/91717012.pdf.
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
462 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


I. Digital Development: From a Technology-Oriented
   Project to the Building of a Data-Driven World
      The rapid advance of information and communication technologies has
revolutionized the society as a whole, including the way a state governs and
how people interact with each other. While the degree of digital development is
often measured by the coverage and accessibility of digital technologies and
services in a given society,1 the vision is not just to use and apply technology
and digital tools for development (ICT4D) but to build a global network
society in which information is strategically used to drive development.2 In
this way, not only are new business models formed and government decisions
made through the use of digital technologies,3 but values in the new economy
are created and intelligent insights for governing purposes are informed by as
much data as cutting-edge information technologies and analytic tools are now
able to process effortlessly. The quest for a data-driven economy and data-
driven governance begets growing hunger for data. It is against this backdrop
that whether and how data should be collected and analyzed, normative
questions rather than a purely technical matter, come to the fore in discussions
about how digital development can be further realized.
      Taiwan launched its first e-Government program in 1998 with a mission
to set up a government internet infrastructure and the integration of its
information systems to enable electronic exchange of data within the
government.4 Service-oriented elements were later added to the e-Government

1
    INTERNATIONAL TELECOMMUNICATION UNION, MEASURING DIGITAL DEVELOPMENT: FACTS
    AND FIGURES 2020 (2020).
2
    Jonathan Donner, Keynote Remarks at the USAID Digital Development Forum: A Vision of
    Digital Development in 2028, CARIBOU DIGITAL (Mar. 10, 2018), https://medium.com/
    caribou-digital/a-vision-of-digital-development-in-2028-43c8ff3c69e.
3
    United Nation Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), Digital Economy Report
    2019: Value Creation and Capture: Implications for Developing Countries (Sept. 4, 2019),
    https://unctad.org/system/files/official-document/der2019_en.pdf.
4
    See RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND EVALUATION COMMISSION OF EXECUTIVE YUAN, MID-
    RANGE PLAN FOR ELECTRONIC AND NETWORKED GOVERNMENT (1997).
                                          Digital Development and Privacy     463


infrastructure to provide electronic versions of government services in the
second and the third phases of the e-Government program. Up to this point,
digital development was only a tool for the government to do its usual business
and provide existing services in a more expedient way. In 2016, Taiwan’s
“Digital Nation, Innovative Economy Development Plan (DIGI+) 2017-2025”
began to adopt a more comprehensive concept of digital transformation with an
emphasis on a data-driven “innovative economy and digital governance.”
Enshrining the vision of crafting a “digital nation and smart island,” DIGI+ put
forth all sorts of policies and programs that can be fully realized only if large-
scale data can be made available for analysis to generate insights for smarter
governance and innovation, which ultimately contributes to higher economic
growth.5
     We have seen just in recent years that consumer behaviors and preferences
revealed by past consumption records have become the Holy Grail for all sorts
of companies. Businesses are looking for ways to create value by targeting the
right customers for their products and services or developing new products or
services to meet the needs of a niche market. As people are now well aware of
social networking sites collecting “like and share” patterns of their users to
produce filter bubbles, private vendors also clandestinely attach tags to
websites that each user browses to create persona profiles for precision
marketing. Smart meters are installed by the power company to record
different users’ electricity usage habits in order to arrange a more energy
efficient power grid. These are but a few real-world examples of how data can
generate more value in the economy. Under the DIGI+ plan and the following
Smart Government 2.0 programs, the “data rush” seen in the private sector has
also become a trendy fashion in the government’s digital development
strategies. Government policy and decision making, such as traffic
management, prevention and response to disasters, crime control, allocation of

5
    See NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL, SERVICE-BASED SMART GOVERNMENT PLAN: THE
    FIFTH PHASE OF E-GOVERNMENT PROGRAM (2018).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
464 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


healthcare resources, and methods to combat wealth inequality, are expected to
be sensibly informed by data already collected by the government. The
government is also actively involved in “making data available for secondary
uses” in roughly three ways: first, making government collected data available
for private sector; second, making use of data collected by private sector for
allegedly public purposes; third, creating more data for future uses.

II. Making Government-Collected                    Data      Available       for
    Value-Added Secondary Uses
     As government is the single most active data collector in a modern
society, those who consider data to be the driving force of the new economy
naturally look to government databases for gold mining opportunities. For
example, retailers are asking for government-held demographic and public
transportation data, to identify the best new store locations; real estate agencies
use fuzzy transaction price data released by the Ministry of the Interior to
develop price prediction algorithms based on types and locations of properties.
However, pressure to open government data for value-added secondary uses is
not limited to aggregate or statistical data. Microdata that contain much more
detailed information about individuals are the real trophy for both profit-
seeking entrepreneurs and curious researchers. Under the banner of inclusive
financing, Fintech start-up companies have already tried hard to gain access to
individual credit information. They expect to use credit reporting data, which
can only be collected by the government-approved Joint Credit Information
Center (JCIC) and be shared among its member institutions, as a stepping stone
to compete with traditional big commercial banks by introducing specific
financial products and services to people with particular risk profiles.
Individual health records statutorily required to be collected by the National
Health Insurance Administration (NHIA) for insurance claim review are now
considered by many to be treasure that should be open for exploration with big
data analytic tools for either academic or commercial purposes. However, the
                                           Digital Development and Privacy    465


ways in which Taiwan’s government handles demands for access to individual
credit information and health insurance records of the entire population
represent two very different models of data sharing to pursue digital
development.

    A. Model 1: Autonomy-based Approach
     Despite the fact that individual credit information is currently open only
to financial institutions that are tightly regulated and that no such regulation
yet applies to Fintech companies, the government seems to be willing to give
the green light to unregulated novel uses subject to each individual’s consent.
The rhetoric of the data subject’s autonomy compliments coincidentally the
policy goal of promoting digital transformation in finance.6 Similarly, people
who use a private service that requires submitting certain personal information
now can authorize the transmission of their data to the service provider from a
government database via the MyData platform, a digital service portal
sponsored by the Taiwan government. Thus, an applicant for a personal loan
can authorize the provision of his or her own income tax data as proof of
earnings directly from the National Taxation Bureau to the bank.
     Touted as “secured data transaction based on voluntary consent,” the
autonomy-based approach to data sharing has been welcomed and promoted as
an important tool for digital development.7 However, Taiwan’s government
seems to allow this approach so far only for cases that involve individuals
making secondary uses of their own data. When the scenario comes to the
third-party uses of large-scale data that involve a huge number of data subjects,
the government may think that the costs of an autonomy-based approach would
be too daunting.



6
    FINANCIAL SUPERVISORY COMMISSION, FINTECH DEVELOPMENT ROADMAP (Aug. 27, 2020),
    https://www.fsc.gov.tw/userfiles/file/FinTech%20Development%20Roadmap.pdf.
7
    NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL, ABOUT MYDATA, https://mydata.nat.gov.tw/sp/about
    (last visited July 12, 2021).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
466 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


    B. Model 2: De-identification Approach
      As the rhetoric of autonomy is deemed inappropriate for governance of
large-scale secondary data uses, a model that relies instead on means of de-
identification has become more dominant. In the case of National Health
Insurance (NHI) data, for example, not only was consent not sought before
health data belonging to individuals were put to secondary uses, but the
government also rejected, primarily on the ground that pseudonyms have been
used to prevent disclosure of direct identifiers, data subjects’ requests to cease
processing their NHI data for unspecified secondary research uses. As the
pseudonyms, which remain universally unique identifiers scrambled from
national identity numbers, still allow data belonging to a specific person within
the NHI database to be linked among different datasets and to other databases,
the risk of indirect identification is never completely ruled out. It is therefore
highly questionable that unconditionally depriving data subjects of autonomy
over their health data would be in compliance with the constitutional principle
of proportionality, especially when what the data subjects claimed is merely a
right of ex post opt-out. Other examples of pseudonymized but potentially
linkable microdata in government databases, which are also made available for
secondary uses without consent or prior knowledge of data subjects, include at
least household income tax, electronic toll collection data, registry of motor
vehicles, and education records.8 Sharing of microdata in this manner allows
researchers to explore whether there is any hidden link between, say,
performance in past education and current earnings, or commuting routes and
car types. It nevertheless threatens to allow production or reconstruction of
personal profiles and thus touches exactly on the core of the right to “privacy
as independence”.



8
    Zong-Shi Liu, Introduction to the Promotion of Using Government Data for Big Data
    Analysis, 341 GOVERNMENT INFORMATION BULLETIN 1, 1-9 (2016)（in Mandarin：公務機
    關巨量資料分析應用推動簡介）。
                                                Digital Development and Privacy        467


    C. Yet Another Paradigm Shift: Empowerment Approach
     While the resolution of the legal issue regarding the scope of individual
autonomy over data is currently pending in Taiwan’s Constitutional Court, a
paradigm shift from relying upon a convenient but elusive standard of de-
identification as a proper legal ground for secondary data uses to enlisting the
power of information technology or institutional arrangements to better assist
with individual control over personal data has been witnessed in many places
elsewhere in the world.
     As early as 2008, the concept of “dynamic consent” (DC) has been
proposed in the context of biobanking. As a new approach for consent, DC
allows individuals to revisit and review consent decisions and preferences over
time, as and when they choose, by drawing on digital technologies to support
and enhance an ongoing relationship between researchers and participants.9
Later, the concept of “meta consent,” which also rely on modern information
technologies to empower individual control over future data uses, extends the
scope of application to all kinds of data, new or old, and beyond the context of
biomedical research. 10 In addition to technological solutions, new social
institutions also contribute to the paradigm change in data governance. For
example, California’s Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) explicitly recognizes the
right to opt out of the sale of individuals’ personal information. It also strongly
supports the technical standard of user-enabled global privacy control (GPC) to
help online consumers exercise their rights.11 Data subjects in Switzerland can


9
   ENCORE — ENSURING CONSENT AND REVOCATION: THE ENCORE PROJECT, http://www.
   hpl.hp.com/breweb/encoreproject/index.html (last visited July 9, 2021); Jane Kaye et al.,
   Dynamic Consent: A Patient Interface for Twenty‐first Century Research Networks, 23
   EUR. J. HUM. GENET. 141, 141-46 (2015); Harriet J. A. Teare, Megan Prictor & Jane Kaye,
   Reflections on Dynamic Consent in Biomedical Research: The Story So Far, 29 EUR. J.
   HUM. GENET. 649, 649-56 (2021).
10
   Thomas Ploug & Søren Holm, Meta Consent — A Flexible Solution to the Problem of
   Secondary Use of Health Data, 30(9) BIOETHICS 721, 721-32 (2016).
11
   GLOBAL PRIVACY CONTROL, https://globalprivacycontrol.org/#about (last visited July 9,
   2021).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
468 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


join MiData, a data cooperative, and entrust it to manage secondary uses of
their data in accordance with their preferences. Japan’s “Databank” similarly
plays a dual role of a data chamberlain commissioned by data subjects and a
database manager which provides data for secondary uses.
    All of the above examples share a common goal: to reduce transaction
costs for data subjects in exercising their rights. Costs for communicating with
data subjects and ascertaining their preferences are no longer an obstacle or
excuse for taking an easy path of de-identification that results in denying
individual autonomy. More importantly, the new paradigm of data governance
contributes to laying a trustworthy foundation for digital development.
Overlooking this paradigm shift would be a costly mistake and would frustrate
the ideal of building a data-driven world that continues to respect human rights
and democratic value.

III. Government Making Use of Data Collected by
     Private Sector
    In addition to making government collected data available for private
secondary uses, Taiwan’s government is also engaged in making use of data
originally collected by private sector for allegedly public purposes. The
requisition of data by the government is usually made in the name of public
interest and is most evident in a time of emergency, such as the Covid-19
pandemic we’ve just encountered. Government use of data in private sector is
praised by some as a smart application of the fruits of digital development. Its
exceptional yet sometimes impregnable nature, however, also raises the
concerns of unruly power expansion.
    As personal information is continuously created as digital footprints of
human activities in private life, the law assures in principle that those data
would stay private unless it is expressly required by law or is necessary for
                                            Digital Development and Privacy      469


furthering public interests among others.12 Such assurance, however, proves to
be tenuous.
     During the Covid-19 pandemic, the government requisitioned from
private third parties several forms of personal data originally collected for
purposes entirely irrelevant to disease control. For example, credit card
transaction records, mobile phone registration and geolocation data were taken
to map the footprints of possible cases and potential contacts.13 While the
Communicable Disease Control Act (CDC Act) only authorizes the public
health authority to conduct epidemic investigation “to ascertain the origin of a
disease,” the government alleges that the power of “tracing potential contacts”
is also within the authorization of the law. The government further argues that
the same legal provision not only allows the authority to compel all sorts of
third parties to provide identifiable information for epidemic investigation, but
gives it the power to employ high-tech methods used mainly in criminal
investigation, such as obtaining mobile phone signals of hundreds of thousands
of people from their mobile phone companies without their knowledge and
consent, to trace potential contacts as well. That is probably because the
Constitutional Court had admitted in a previous case a weaker form of due
process protection to individuals and stopped short of allowing the government
to do whatever it takes to end a pandemic.14 The government is now more
inclined to expand the statutory interpretation of the law to its greatest extent
and to adopt measures that are not clearly authorized.
     When the line between normality and a state of exception becomes
blurred, government making secondary uses of privately collected data may


12
   Article 20 of Personal Data Protection Act (2015).
13
   Chi-Mai Chen et al., Containing COVID-19 Among 627,386 Persons in Contact With the
   Diamond Princess Cruise Ship Passengers Who Disembarked in Taiwan: Big Data
   Analytics, 22(5) J. MED. INTERNET RES. 1170, 1173 (2020); MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND
   WELFARE, KEY SUCCESS FACTORS: SMART COMMUNITY TRANSMISSION PREVENTION,
   https://covid19.mohw.gov.tw/en/cp-4775-53739-206.html (last visited July 9, 2021).
14
   Interpretation No. 690 of the Constitutional Court, Judicial Yuan (2011).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
470 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


become a new normal. It raises the worries about “function creep,” a
phenomenon in which information collected for one purpose tends to be used
for ever-expanding and very often undisclosed purposes,15 and casts another
shadow over the future of digital development.

IV. Government Engaged in Creating More Data for
    Future Uses
       It is in the above atmosphere that the government policy to issue an
electronic version of national identity cards (eID) faces challenges and doubts.
       The first Taiwan national identity card was issued in 1948 as a tool
accompanying household regulation. It also served as a means to verify
identity before government agencies assigned public obligations or conferred
rights. The national ID card has begun to carry a lifelong one-person-one-
number UID in 1965 as an anti-counterfeit measure. When it became
mandatory in 1973, the function of the national ID card remained limited to
identity verification in the course of public agencies performing statutory
duties.
       However, the law that authorized the mandatory national identity card
does not clearly prohibit the use of the card beyond its statutorily sanctioned
purposes. The vague language of the law breeds extremely broad uses or even
abuses of the cards and the ID numbers. Businesses taking a person’s ID
number as a direct identifier in their information systems is a common
practice. Handing over one’s national ID card to others as proof of identity in
exchange for private services is also regularly seen in our daily life. The paper-
based nature of the card and the analog nature of identity information on the
card nevertheless restrain the proliferation of data.
       Once the national ID card is embedded with an RFID microchip and the


15
     Evelina Manukyan & Joseph Guzzetta, How Function Creep May Cripple App-based
     Contact Tracing, THE INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF PRIVACY PROFESSIONALS (May 27,
     2020), https://iapp.org/news/a/how-function-creep-may-cripple-app-based-contact-tracing/.
                                                Digital Development and Privacy        471


identity information becomes digitalized, everything will not be the same. eID
is a game changer in that it substantially increases the risks of unwanted data
collection and undisclosed information proliferation if left unregulated. Even
more troublesome in Taiwan’s case is that individuals would be forced, even
without a valid legal authorization, to carry certain electronic identity
information on the card, which is deliberately designed to be accessible by
anyone, and not only authorized agencies; this is beyond its statutorily
designated purposes. No opt-out opportunity is given to allow those who have
concerns about digitalization to choose a deactivated version of the eID card.
Without a law that properly regulates the collection, storage and uses of
electronic identity information, the use and abuse of eID would bring about a
world in which digital footprints proliferate at a speed beyond imagination and
become ready prey for surveillance capitalism. 16 It is through the risk of
function creep, again, that exploitation of digital footprints, rather than real
surveillance by the government, becomes a real threat to the evangelic vision
of digital development enthusiastically promised by the government’s eID
program.

V. Conclusion
      While digital development seems to promise an unconditionally bright
future, it involves a challenging choice between rushing to the goal
unscrupulously and going forward with a load of democratic values. A
competition between liberal democracy and autocracy is clear and intense.
While an authoritarian regime can easily provide a fast-track approach to
digital development at the expense of due process of law and protection of
human rights, steps of a democracy are often mired in debates over values and
goals of a good society. It is always tempting to accomplish the dream of a
data-driven world by submitting whatever data are available for analysis to

16
     Shoshana Zuboff, Surveillance Capitalism and the Challenge of Collective Action, 28(1)
     NEW LAB. F. 10, 10-29 (2019).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
472 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


generate allegedly generous surplus without asking who bears the burdens and
who actually benefits in such a society. Luckily, examples from the
authoritarian regime have reminded us that the road to digital development
without human rights is not the one that we should take.
                                           Digital Development and Privacy   473


                                References
Chen, Chi-Mai, Hong-Wei Jyan, Shih-Chieh Chien, Hsiao-Hsuan Jen, Chen-Yang
     Hsu, Po-Chang Lee, Chun-Fu Lee, Yi-Ting Yang, Meng-Yu Chen, Li-Sheng
     Chen, Hsiu-Hsi Chen, and Chang-Chuan Chan. 2020. Containing COVID-19
     Among 627,386 Persons in Contact With the Diamond Princess Cruise Ship
     Passengers Who Disembarked in Taiwan: Big Data Analytics. Journal of
     Medical Internet Research 22(5):1170-1178.
Donner, Jonathan. 2018. Keynote remarks at the USAID Digital Development
     Forum: A Vision of Digital Development in 2028. Available at
     https://medium.com/caribou-digital/a-vision-of-digital-development-in-2028
     -43c8ff3c69e.
International Telecommunication Union (ITU). 2020. Measuring Digital
     Development: Facts and Figures 2020. Switzerland: International Telecom-
     munication Union.
Kaye, Jane, Edgar A Whitley, David Lund, Michael Morrison, Harriet Teare, and
     Karen Melham. 2015. Dynamic Consent: A Patient Interface for
     Twenty‐first Century Research Networks. European Journal of Human
     Genetics 23:141-146.
Liu, Zong-Shi. 2016. Introduction to the Promotion of Using Government Data
     for Big Data Analysis. Government Information Bulletin 341:5-13.
Manukyan, Evelina, and Joseph Guzzetta. 2020. How Function Creep May
     Cripple App-based Contact Tracing. In The International Association of
     Privacy   Professionals.    https://iapp.org/news/a/how-function-creep-may-
     cripple-app-based-contact-tracing/.
Ploug, Thomas, and Søren Holm. 2016. Meta Consent — A Flexible Solution to
     the Problem of Secondary Use of Health Data. Bioethics 30(9):721-732.
Teare, Harriet J. A., Megan Prictor, and Jane Kaye. 2021. Reflections on Dynamic
     Consent in Biomedical Research: The Story So Far. European Journal of
     Human Genetics 29:649-656.
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
474 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


United Nation Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). 2019. Digital
    Economy Report 2019: Value Creation and Capture: Implications for
    Developing Countries. Switzerland: United Nations Publications.
Zuboff, Shoshana. 2019. Surveillance Capitalism and the Challenge of
    Collective Action. New Labor Forum 28(1):10-29.
