                   Fly Me to the Moon
                                  Albie Sachs*



     I am always highly amused when people introduce me at meetings and so
on, and they tell the story of my being thrown into prison, sleep deprivation,
exile, and being blown up by bomb, losing my right arm, back to South Africa,
helping to write the constitution, getting on to the constitutional court and
writing the judgement about same-sex marriage; but the two points that people
remember and say wow and have nothing to do with any of that; the first is I
started legal practice at the age of 21; the second I have an asteroid named
after me. I said wow about these two little things.
     Academia Sinica had nothing to do with when I started legal practice, but
it had everything to do with an asteroid being named after me. This is a story
about eight or nine years ago I am invited to give a lecture in Taiwan. I am
intrigued. Because the theme is to speak about same-sex marriages. I am very
attracted by the invitation, and I am very surprised that it is coming from
Taiwan. Taiwan was not a happy place in my mind for many, many years.
     I became politically active in the 1950s. And my generation far away in
South Africa, far away from China, applauded the Chinese revolution and
supported it. One of our enemies, I wouldn’t say the number one, but very high
up on the list of our enemies on the side of imperialism was Chiang Kai-Shek,
from Taiwan. That was a kind of distant memory. But far more recently, in the
days of the struggle against Apartheid, with Pretoria seeking friends from


*
   Justice of the Constitutional Court of South Africa, 1994-2009; 2014 Laureate of Tang
   Prize, the Rule of Law.
Online: http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/61418012.pdf;
        http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/81618012.pdf (Chinese version).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
264 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


anywhere, being called the polecat of the world, please stand by our side. I
remember there was a big naval review. The South African navy was not huge.
The only ships they got to joining the review were from Pinochet, the navy of
his dictatorship, and Taiwan. So there was an alliance of Pretoria, Santiago,
and Taipei.
     And now I am invited to go to that part of the world that was associated
with so many negative concepts. But I am not invited there to speak about two
Chinas or three Chinas or whatever it might be. I am invited there to speak
about same-sex marriages, and I am attracted by the theme and I go. It is one
of those high moments for me, deeply memorable, in a life that has had many
high moments. Being in the dance studio in Taipei, there was the wonderful,
magisterial, extremely eloquent Japanese-American Kenji Yoshino on the little
platform in the dance studio, people sitting on the floor, speaking. He is a gay
man, I am a straight South African man who supports gay rights. And I am
feeling the emotions of not just of the issue, but also of the place, of the space
－the dance studio had been a center of opposition to the extreme authoritarian
times and regime in Taiwan. And it was something about the informality of the
setting that seems to direct the connection between the speakers and the
audience. It was so different from the ordinary scholarly seminar setting. My
heart was like beating, my ears open. I was thrilled by the eloquence and
refinement of Kenji’s presentation.
     It didn’t stop there, because I was taken on a visit to other spaces in
Taipei connected with the struggle against the autocratic, at times extremely
ruthlessly brutal, regime of the early period. So now I am seeing a different
Taiwan, a Taiwan associated not with authoritarianism and reaction and
supporting Apartheid, a Taiwan of people fighting for their liberty, for their
dignity, for their humanity, and I can identify very comfortably with that.
     Some time passes. I get lots of invitations from many parts of the world.
This experience goes down into my kind of, if you like, personal Facebook of
interesting occasions. I am now in faraway part of the world, San Diego, I plan
                                                         Fly Me to the Moon 265


to give a lecture to raise funds to pay off my mortgage. My wife Vanessa
September became an architect and designed the most fabulous house by the
beach, and now we have to find money to pay for it; I did not know how we
gonna do so. I am far way, giving a lecture in San Diego, quite well paid in
dollars. I am saving, I remember, on many things, taking two apples that I got
free, some free water, buying some nuts to save money for lunch, and I open
my computer and I see a very strange message: ‘Congratulations, we would
like to announced that you have won a prize, the Tang Prize, for the Rule of
Law. A million dollars.’ ‘Ha, hahahaha’ I laughed. I was getting these
messages all the time. But as I am looking for the statement ‘please give us
your bank account’, it is not there. And I read it and reread it; being an
advocate and a judge, I looked for the mistake to prove it’s a scam. I can’t find
it. And it’s signed by Professor Cheng-Yi Huang, that rings a bell, but I am not
all that familiar with Chinese names; I read it again and again; eventually I
decide it’s true. I tried to tell my wife what is happening, but she didn’t pick up
the phone; I phoned again and again; eventually I decided ‘okay’, and I
remember going out to buy a hamburger.
     I tell the story dramatically, because it was very dramatic for me. I give
away half that money; I don’t like the idea of having too much money. Also
included was a research grant. That became transformatory of my life, because
with that funding Vanessa and I were able to set up a foundation for promoting
constitutionalism and the rule of law in South Africa, and she is now the CEO
of the Constitution Hill Trust that works precisely on promoting the idea of
constitutionalism in South Africa.
     In South Africa today things are very dramatic with the Rule of Law being
articulated and expressed in its most poignant and powerful form by our
Acting Chief Justice Sisi Khampepe ordering the arrest and imprisonment of
our former President Jacob Zuma for contempt of the Constitutional Court.
Sure, these are very dramatic connections to have. It was Taiwan and
Academia Sinica that made the connections, playing a very important role in
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
266 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


my biography as it turned out.
     This is followed by many future visits to Taiwan. It was wonderful
receiving the Prize, which was done graciously; the elegant ceremony; I met
lots of other people; I met winners of the other Prizes. I feel part of a very
wonderful elite.… I have spent my whole life fighting elitism, and now I am
joining the elite in a rather spectacular way! Well, if you gonna do it, lie back
and enjoy it. And I enjoyed it.
     But the part that reached me most profoundly was not the ceremonial part.
It is being invited to come back to participate in the simulated constitutional
court hearing on capital punishment. A big theme. A profound theme. What I
admire so much about Academia Sinica is the way it involves itself in engaged
scholarship. The engagement is important. It’s people who fought for their
freedom, who feel it in their hearts. They are not just lawyers picking up a
good cause to help somebody, and having a decent vocation. It is existential
for them. That sense of connection with the history of the community, of the
people. But it is not simply engagement; it’s scholarship, and it’s rigorous
scholarship, scientific scholarship, evidence-based scholarship; it’s based on
logic and thought, rationality and ideas; that makes for a profoundly significant
combination. It produces ideas of particular, extra richness, because it isn’t just
the beauty of ideas. I like the beauty of ideas. It is the beauty of ideas that
connect up with the heart and soul, the innermost dignity of human beings. So
I am very happy to be invited to say congratulations on your tenth birthday.
     I mustn’t forget to mention: the asteroid. It was the National Central
University of Taiwan invited me to make a presentation there; they greeted me
warmly, photographed me on a bench. And later on they announced, let an
asteroid be named the Albie Sachs Asteroid. It’s not like a planet. I think that it
was the twenty fifth thousand and something asteroid to be named. It was
spectacular for me. I have been a dreamer my whole life, and now I was
literally reaching out to the cosmos, to the stars.
