     The Institutum Iurisprudentiae:
    Multifaceted Perspectives on Law
     in China, Law and Cross-Strait
          Issues, and China and
             International Law
                                 Jacques deLisle*



     The Institutum Iurisprudentiae has much to celebrate as it reaches the
tenth anniversary of its founding. Although it has existed as a full-fledged
institute for only a decade, its work brings together two legal traditions with
deep roots. The Latin chosen for its “English”-language name, its location in
the equally Latin-named Academia Sinica, and the scales of justice on its
original logo all evoke the Western legal tradition that emerged from classical
Rome and that has influenced law throughout the world, including in Mainland
China and Taiwan. The Chinese legal tradition with ancient roots is represented
as well, in the 金文-style rendering of the traditional character for “law” —
灋 — and the related image of the 廌 or 獬豸 — the mythical single-horned
goat-like creature that distinguishes right from wrong. Both graced the lobby
of the Institute in its early days, and a statue of the 獬豸 occupies a prominent


*
   Stephen A. Cozen Professor of Law, Professor of Political Science, Director of the Center
   for the Study of Contemporary China, University of Pennsylvania, and Director of the Asia
   Program, Foreign Policy Research Institute. The author thanks Hannah Bases,
   intern at FPRI, for her help in preparing this essay.
Online: http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/52618012.pdf;
        http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/70519012.pdf (Chinese version).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
102 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


place at my law school in the West, commemorating the first course on
Chinese law taught at an American law school.1
     This prowess of the Institute in bringing together East and West is
reflected in the training of its scholars, who have been educated in law and
related subjects at leading universities in Taiwan and in North America and
Europe. It is manifest in the richly comparative legal scholarship that many of
the Institute’s scholars have produced — whether explicitly addressing
multiple jurisdictions or eras, or focusing on Taiwan or a single foreign
jurisdiction but enriched by an implicit comparative perspective. These outputs
have done much to achieve one of the Institute’s foundational goals: expanding
the breadth and depth of learning in the law in Taiwan.
     The Institute’s contributions are so vast that a single, short essay cannot
begin to address them, and so varied that much of the research inevitably lies
beyond the expertise of any one commentator. I will limit my focus here to
work that advances our understanding of law in China and legal issues that
matter for Taiwan’s place in the world (something that is, of course,
significantly affected by China and that can also influence China). Even this
seemingly limited scope encompasses a great deal of what the Institute’s
diverse scholarship and programming cover. Such is the richness of what the
Institute produces. Work in these areas includes some that falls within one of
the Institute’s original six core research areas, such as “legal development in
Mainland China, Hong Kong and Macao,” but it also extends far into other
core fields, including ones that encompass human rights, several public law
topics, and comparative legal-institutional studies. In some respects, the
relevant studies even touch upon some of the Institute’s core research areas
that might seem at most marginally relevant to these issues, such as Taiwan’s


1
    See DERK BODDE & CLARENCE MORRIS, LAW IN IMPERIAL CHINA: EXEMPLIFIED BY 190
    CH’ING DYNASTY CASES WITH HISTORICAL, SOCIAL AND JUDICIAL COMMENTARIES (1973);
    W. Allyn Rickett, Clarence Morris and His Contribution to the Study of Chinese Law, 121
    U. PA. L. REV. 427, 427-29 (1973).
             The Institutum Iurisprudentiae: Multifaceted Perspectives on Law in
             China, Law and Cross-Strait Issues, and China and International Law 103


constitutional structure, or law, science, and technology. Much of the work that
falls within this scope also has furthered another of the Institute’s founding
goals: closing the gap between academic research and solving practical
problems.
      Institute scholars’ studies of the law of the People’s Republic of China
have covered a wide range of important areas, from business law to public law.
Some of this work has contributed to important international scholarly debates
about how to understand and evaluate China’s distinctive — but not entirely
unique — model for enterprise organization and finance, corporate governance,
and property rights. 2 Other research has offered noteworthy critical
assessments of China’s approach to law and human rights and the challenges
China’s approach poses to international norms.3 Institute scholars also have
examined the intersection of law and politics in the disconcerting context of
increasingly authoritarian post-reversion Hong Kong.4 The Institute also has
done impressively well in gathering and stimulating work on law in the
Mainland, Hong Kong, Macau — and, of course, Taiwan as well. Among the
larger-scale examples are the conference-based collections the Institute
produced in its early years under the title 兩岸四地法律發展.5 Many other

2
    See, for example, the work of Yun-chien Chang.
3
    See, for example, Chien-Chih Lin, Constitutions and Courts in Chinese Authoritarian
    Regimes: China and Pre-Democratic Taiwan in Comparison, 14 INT’L J. CONST. L. 351,
    351-77 (2016); Shwu-Fann Liou, Comment, in 2006 CROSS-STRAIT, FOUR-REGION: LAW
    DEVELOPMENTS IN TAIWAN, CHINA, HONG KONG, AND MACAU 389, 389-96 (Dennis T. C.
    Tang & Peng-Hsiang Wang eds., 2007); Yu-Jie Chen, China’s Challenge to the
    International Human Rights Regime, 51 N.Y.U. J. INT’L L. & POL. 1179, 1179-1222 (2019).
4
    See, for example, Jimmy Chia-Shin Hsu & Anne S.Y. Cheung, The Ultimate Test of
    Fidelity: Judicial Responses to Civil Disobedience in Hong Kong and Taiwan, in
    DEMOCRACY AND RULE OF LAW IN CHINA’S SHADOW 33, 33-63 (Brian Christopher Jones,
    ed., 2021); Chien-Chih Lin, Legal Mobilization Under Authoritarianism: The Case of Post-
    Colonial Hong Kong, 16(1) TAIWAN DEMOCRACY Q. 163, 163-70 (2019) (book review);
    Yu-Jie Chen & Jerome A. Cohen, Freedom from Arbitrary Detention in Asia: Lessons from
    China, Taiwan, and Hong Kong, in OXFORD HANDBOOK OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW IN ASIA,
    (David Law, Holning Lau & Alex Schwartz, eds.) (forthcoming).
5
    INSTITUTUM IURISPRUDENTIAE ACADEMIA SINICA, https://www.iias.sinica.edu.tw/en/
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
104 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


instances of fine scholarship on legal developments in these areas can be found
in the pages of the Academia Sinica Law Journal, which has published nearly
thirty issues in less than fifteen years.6
      Much of the Institute’s work has engaged with often politically
contentious and legally complex questions related to cross-Strait relations. In
some cases, the focus has been specifically on legal issues between Taiwan and
the Mainland.7 More often, Institute scholars’ work has spoken more obliquely
but very powerfully to Taiwan’s relationship with the Mainland through the
study of Taiwan’s own example and its contrasts with the PRC’s. The extensive
research outputs by Institute scholars on Taiwan’s legal ideals and experience
with human rights, constitutionalism, government accountability under law,
and much more, have addressed — sometimes explicitly and often
implicitly — salient differences across the Strait. These include questions of
fundamental “values” and differences in “system type” that make the cross-
Strait issue so fraught and intractable, that vividly demonstrate how a
democratic, rights-protecting, rule-of-law order is possible in a broadly
Chinese cultural context, and that are a vital asset in Taiwan’s quest for
international status and the autonomy and security such status helps to
provide.8

    publication/11 (last visited Aug. 11, 2021).
6
    INSTITUTUM IURISPRUDENTIAE ACADEMIA SINICA, https://www.iias.sinica.edu.tw/en/publi
    cation_list/9 (last visited Aug. 11, 2021).
7
    See, for example Yu-Jie Chen & Jerome A. Cohen, China-Taiwan Relations Re-examined:
    The “1992 Consensus” and Cross-Strait Agreements, 14 U. PA. ASIAN L. REV. 1, 1-40
    (2019); Chien-Liang Lee, Human Dignity, Freedom of Adoption, and System Protection in
    Cross-Strait Relations — Interpretation No. 712, 250 TAIWAN L.J. 29, 29-52 (2014); See
    also Fort Fu-Te Liao, After Ratifying the ICCPR — Implementation of Right to Self-
    Determination, Right of Privacy, and Right of Family (2012). commissioned by the
    National Science Council.
8
    Among the Institute scholars who have made significant contributions in this area are Tzu-
    Yi Lin, Dennis Te-Chung Tang, Yen-Tu Su, Jimmy Chia-Shin Hsu, Tzung-Mou Wu,
    Chien-Chih Lin, Chien-Liang Lee, Cheng-Yi Huang, Peng-Hsiang Wang, Tay-Sheng
    Wang, Ching-Yi Liu, and Chwen-Wen Chen. On why these issues matter for Taiwan’s
    international status and, in turn, autonomy and security, see Jacques deLisle, “All the
             The Institutum Iurisprudentiae: Multifaceted Perspectives on Law in
             China, Law and Cross-Strait Issues, and China and International Law 105


     Much of this scholarship that helps to present Taiwan as an implied legal
contrast to the PRC also speaks to another set of key questions for our time —
ones also engaged by Institute scholars whose research focuses on international
law (primarily human rights),9 or on the regulation of some of today’s most
pressing transnational legal issues, including the environment, cyberspace, and
public health.10 Such work, of course, makes contributions on multiple fronts,
many beyond the scope of the discussion here. But it also speaks to the vital
question of how much China can be influenced by, and will influence,
international law and law-related norms that matter for Taiwan, for China, and
for the wider world. 11 How much will China destabilize and reshape
international human rights norms? How extensively can the emerging
international and transnational law of the internet, artificial intelligence, and
climate change be shaped by — or shape — China and its domestic legal
order? How will the international legal regime for global public health and the
domestic regulatory regimes of China and other affected countries adapt in
response to the terrifying weaknesses shown by the COVID-19 pandemic? On
these issues, we all can learn much from the voluminous and wide-ranging
research by the Institute’s scholars or presented at the Institute’s events and


   World’s a Stage”: Taiwan’s Human Rights Performance and Playing to International
   Norms, in TAIWAN AND INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS: A STORY OF TRANSFORMATION
   173, 173-206 (Jerome A. Cohen, William P. Alford & Chang-Fa Lo eds., 2019); Jacques
   deLisle, Taiwan’s Quest for International Space in the Tsai Era: Adapting Old Strategies to
   New Circumstances, in TAIWAN IN THE ERA OF TSAI ING-WEN: CHANGES AND CHALLENGES
   239, 239-83 (June Teufel Dreyer & Jacques deLisle, eds., 2021).
9
   See, for example, works by Jimmy Chia-Shin Hsu, Fort Fu-Te Liao, Yu-Jie Chen, and
   Chien-Liang Lee.
10
   Institute scholars doing valuable work in these areas include Dennis Te-Chung Tang, Tzu-
   Yi Lin, Shun-Ling Chen, Ching-Yi Liu, Wen-Tsong Chiou, and Chuan-Feng Wu.
11
   See generally, Jacques deLisle, The Chinese Model of Law, China’s Agenda in International
   Law, and Implications for Democracy in Asia and Beyond, in DEMOCRATIZATION,
   NATIONAL IDENTITY, AND FOREIGN POLICY IN ASIA 38, 38-59 (Gilbert Rozman ed., 2021);
   Jacques deLisle & Shen Kui, Lessons from China’s Response to COVID-19: Shortcomings,
   Successes, and Prospects for Reform in the Chinese Regulatory State, 16 U. PA. ASIAN L.
   REV 66, 66-149 (2020).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
106 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


conferences and in its publications.
       I have left out much that deserves recognition in the Institute’s work, and
have given none of the Institute’s scholars their due while omitting some
entirely. That is a regrettable but inevitable feature of any brief overview of
prodigious accomplishments, and a product of my inadvertence and limited
familiarity with some aspects of the Institute’s undertakings.
       The foregoing also fails to capture one of the Institute’s greatest strengths
and scholarly contributions. The Institute is a remarkable locus for intellectual
exchange. To walk through the elegant lobby and into offices and conference
rooms of the Institutum Iurisprudentiae is to join a discussion of important and
often timely ideas with insightful and erudite colleagues who are eager to
engage. To return to the theme of the Institute’s fruitful melding of Chinese
and Western traditions, the Institute echoes the ’Aκαδημία — Plato’s
Academy — and the 東林書院 — the Donglin Academy.12 Those two earlier
academies — one in the birthplace of Western democracy and critical thought,
and the other a source of what, to today’s ears, sounds like political
engagement by reformist intellectuals challenging an inequitable order — were
seminal to traditions that inform the modern-day work of the Institutum
Iurisprudentiae at the Academia Sinica. During its young life, the Institute has
been impressively entwined with, and made academic and practical
contributions to, Taiwan’s remarkable development of a liberal-democratic,
constitutional rule of law — a point nicely underscored by the Institute’s early
proponents and recent leaders, from Herbert H.P. Ma, to Dennis Te-Chung
Tang, and Tzu-Yi Lin, serving as eminent Grand Justices of Taiwan’s
Constitutional Court. Like so many friends of the Institute, I look forward to
the day — hopefully soon — when I can return and resume in person the
collegial conversation with the Institute’s scholars.


12
     The Institute also sees itself as party of the broad Chinese “academies” tradition. When the
     Institute opened, the 院規 of 白鹿洞書院 — founded two dynasties earlier than the 東林
     書院 hung in the Institute’s entrance.
            The Institutum Iurisprudentiae: Multifaceted Perspectives on Law in
            China, Law and Cross-Strait Issues, and China and International Law 107


                                References
Bodde, Derk, and Clarence Morris. 1973. Law in Imperial China: Exemplified by
    190 Ch’ing Dynasty Cases with Historical, Social and Judicial
    Commentaries. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Chen, Yu-Jie. 2019. China’s Challenge to the International Human Rights Regime.
    New York University Journal of International Law and Politics 51:1179-
    1222.
Chen, Yu-Jie, and Jerome A. Cohen. 2019. China-Taiwan Relations Re-examined:
    The “1992 Consensus” and Cross-Strait Agreements. University of
    Pennsylvania Asian Law Review 14:1-40.
─. Forthcoming. Freedom from Arbitrary Detention in Asia: Lessons from
    China, Taiwan, and Hong Kong. In Oxford Handbook of Constitutional Law
    in Asia, edited by David Law, Holning Lau, and Alex Schwartz. Oxford:
    Oxford University Press.
deLisle, Jacques. 2019. “All the World’s a Stage”: Taiwan’s Human Rights
    Performance and Playing to International Norms. Pp. 173-206 in Taiwan and
    International Human Rights: A Story of Transformation, edited by Jerome A.
    Cohen, William P. Alford, and Chang-Fa Lo. Singapore: Springer.
─. 2021. Taiwan’s Quest for International Space in the Tsai Era: Adapting
    Old Strategies to New Circumstances. Pp. 239-283 in Taiwan in the Era of
    Tsai Ing-Wen: Changes and Challenges, edited by June Teufel Dreyer and
    Jacques deLisle. New York, NY: Routledge.
─. 2021. The Chinese Model of Law, China’s Agenda in International Law,
    and Implications for Democracy in Asia and Beyond. Pp. 38-59 in
    Democratization, National Identity, and Foreign Policy in Asia, edited by
    Gilbert Rozman. New York, NY: Routledge.
deLisle, Jacques, and Shen Kui. 2020. Lessons from China’s Response to
    COVID-19: Shortcomings, Successes, and Prospects for Reform in the
    Chinese Regulatory State. University of Pennsylvania Asian Law Review
    16:66-149.
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
108 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


Lee, Chien-Liang. 2014. Human Dignity, Freedom of Adoption, and System
    Protection in Cross-Strait Relations — Interpretation No. 712. Taiwan Law
    Journal 250:29-52.
Liao, Fort Fu-Te. 2012. After Ratifying the ICCPR — Implementation of Right to
    Self-Determination, Right of Privacy, and Right of Family. Commissioned
    by the National Science Council.
Lin, Chien-Chih. 2016. Constitutions and Courts in Chinese Authoritarian
    Regimes: China and Pre-Democratic Taiwan in Comparison. International
    Journal of Constitutional Law 14:351-377.
─. 2019. (book review) Legal Mobilization Under Authoritarianism: The
    Case of Post-Colonial Hong Kong. Taiwan Democracy Quarterly 16(1):163-
    170.
Liou, Shwu-Fann. 2007. Comment. Pp.389-396 in 2006 Cross-Strait, Four-
    Region Law Developments in Taiwan, China, Hong Kong, and Macau,
    Volume One, edited by Dennis T. C. Tang and Peng-Hsiang Wang. Taipei:
    Academia Sinica Institute of Law Preparatory Office.
Hsu, Jimmy Chia-Shin, and Anne S.Y. Cheung. 2021. The Ultimate Test of
    Fidelity: Judicial Responses to Civil Disobedience in Hong Kong and
    Taiwan. Pp. 33-63 in Democracy and Rule of Law in China’s Shadow, edited
    by Brian Christopher Jones. Oxford: Hart Publishing.
Rickett, W. Allyn. 1973. Clarence Morris and His Contribution to the Study of
    Chinese Law. University of Pennsylvania Law Review 121:427-429.
