              The IIAS’s First Decade:
              An Extraordinary Record
                                William P. Alford*



     I am greatly honored that the Institutum Iurisprudentiae of the Academia
Sinica (IIAS) has invited me to contribute to this volume marking its highly
successful first decade.
     I vividly remember my first sojourn to the Academia Sinica in 1975 when,
as a fledgling law student, I had the privilege of studying Qing dynasty legal
materials with the brilliant and generous legal historian, Dr. Wejen Chang.
Then and when visiting over the next few decades, I would at times wonder
why the Academia Sinica, which was so distinguished in so many fields, did
not have its own legal research center (Dr. Chang was a fellow of the Institute
of History and Philology, and there were, to be sure, scholars at the Institute of
European and American Studies who, on occasion, worked on issues with a
significant legal dimension).
     Happily, the Institute that did develop is nothing short of extraordinary.
With the benefit of earlier deliberations led by such distinguished jurists as
former Grand Justices Han-bao Ma and Tze-chien Wang, when the IIAS did
launch in 2011, under the leadership of another distinguished Grand Justice,
Dennis T. C. Tang, it set itself very ambitious goals. It, quite wisely, aspired to
be a center that would foster research that met the highest international
standards while still being mindful of the particular needs of Taiwan. And it

*
   Jerome A. and Joan L. Cohen Professor of Law, Director of the East Asian
   Legal Studies Program, Harvard Law School.
Online: http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/11418012.pdf;
        http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/11518012.pdf (Chinese version).
     研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
82   THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY



has done just that by judiciously focusing its attention on six clusters,
including) (i) Constitutional Structure and Human Rights; (ii) Administrative
Regulation and Judicial Remedies; (iii) Law, Science, and Technology; (iv)
Jurisprudence and Social Transformation; (v) Legal Development in China,
Hong Kong, and Macau; and (vi) Comparative Study of Judicial Systems,
Empirical Study of Judicial Behavior, and Legislative Studies. For this, the
eminent former Grand Justice Tzu-yi Lin, who served as head of the IIAS from
2012-2019, his worthy successor Chien-liang Lee deserve great credit.
    In saying this, I am not engaging in 客氣話. When Jerome Cohen of
NYU School of Law, former Grand Justice Chang-fa Lo, and I did our 2019
book   TAIWAN AND INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS: A STORY OF
TRANSFORMATION, we wanted to enlist the best scholars we could find
anywhere in the world to contribute essays on their areas of specialization. We
also very much wanted the book to mirror Taiwan’s intellectual diversity and
so, through that range of approach and perspective, to be living proof of what
an open and vibrant society it is. And so it was that we ended up with six
different members of the IIAS faculty ─ Yu-Jie Chen, Cheng-Yi Huang,
Chien-Chih Lin, Fort Fu-Te Liao, Yen-tu Su and Chuan-Feng Wu ─
contributing papers on subjects including constitutional theory, constitutional
practice, transitional justice, national human rights institutions, public
international law, and the right to health united only by their uniform
excellence. The volume won a major award (the American Society of
International Law’s 2020 Certificate of Merit for a Specialized Work in
International Law) and I am confident that their papers played an important
part in that.
     Knowing what I do of the research output of other faculty ─ as evident
through their research output, through the Academia Sinica Law Journal, and
through dazzling array of conferences on topics from constitutional
interpretation to empirical legal studies, I am also confident that similar
glowing results would have been achieved. Several of my Harvard colleagues
                            The IIAS’s First Decade: An Extraordinary Record   83


─ including Richard Parker, Holger Spamann, Cass Sunstein, Mark Tushnet
and Adrian Vermeule ─ have had the pleasure of visiting the IIAS and have
come back suitably impressed. And we are pleased that so many Harvard
graduates and former visiting scholars (including founding Director Tang and
long-time Director Lin) have been among the IIAS’s faculty ─ although
fairness requires my acknowledging that the IIAS also numbers among its
faculty excellent graduates of several of the world’s other leading law schools.
     The IIAS’s accomplishments over its first decade have set a very high
standard and pace, but I am certain that this is but a precursor of more
greatness in the future. I look forward eagerly to that, and to my school and
colleagues contributing to that and learning from it.
     研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
84   THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY
