    A Happy and Meaningful Occasion
                              Jerome A. Cohen*



     Hats off to Academia Sinica’s Institute of Law on its tenth birthday!
Although a decade is a very short time, the Institute has already made a
significant impact not only at home in Taiwan but also increasingly abroad.
The publications of its staff, its learned law journal, its conferences and round
tables and its hosting of a variety of distinguished scholars and professionals
from many countries have gradually served to put this young and distinctive
group on the world’s legal map.
     Of course, in 2011 the Institute did not suddenly spring full-blown from
the head of Zeus. Its roots trace back to the turn of the current century.
Reflecting the island’s then stunning recent progress toward democratic
government, the rule of law and respect for human rights, a far-sighted group
of local scholars initiated the process of establishing a research institution
commensurate with the encouraging political-legal developments and the
enhanced legal education that had begun to bolster this progress.
     The current accomplishments of the Institute must be a source of great
satisfaction to Professors and former Constitutional Court Justices Herbert
Han-pao Ma and Tze-chien Wang and their colleagues who, over twenty years
ago, began to discuss plans for what eventually developed under the leadership
of Professor Dennis T. C. Tang, the Institute’s first Director, and his


*
   Professor of Law Emeritus, New York University School of Law; Founding Faculty
   Director Emeritus of New York University Law School’s US-Asia Law Institute; Adjunct
   Senior Fellow for Asia, Council on Foreign Relations.
Online: http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/71618012.pdf;
        http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/30719012.pdf (Chinese version).
     研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
88   THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY



successors Professor Tzu-yi Lin and now Professor Chien-liang Lee.
     To be sure, scholars in other departments of Academia Sinica had already
made significant contributions to various fields of legal research. I especially
recall the very important work in China’s legal history that the Institute of
History and Philology undertook beginning in 1968 under the guidance of its
recently-appointed member, Professor Wejen Chang. Building upon the
Institute’s collection of materials from the judicial archives of the Qing
(Manchu) imperial government and other Qing legal documents that were soon
gathered from basements around the island where they had been disintegrating,
that Institute preserved these invaluable records, organized and reprinted them
for public distribution and then produced scholarly analyses that enhanced our
understanding of Chinese law and society on the eve of twentieth century
modernization. I eagerly await publication of the book that Professor Chang
has completed, which shows how the Qing judicial system was designed and
actually functioned.
     Perhaps Academia Sinica’s records can confirm whether I can
legitimately claim a bit of indirect credit for Professor Chang’s worthy project.
Earlier in 1968, I was a member of a three-person joint delegation to Taiwan of
the American Council of Learned Societies and the Social Sciences Research
Council. We were granted a ninety-minute interview with then President
Chiang Kaishek and Madame Chiang. Just before the meeting, a presidential
advisor alerted us to the likelihood that President Chiang would ask us for
suggestions as to how conditions in Taiwan might be improved. When in fact
he did pose the question, I was tempted to urge him to end his harsh military
dictatorship and establish political freedom and democracy. Instead, however,
with practical considerations in mind, I somewhat sheepishly asked the
President to do more to support the development of studies of China’s rich
legal traditions.
     After acknowledging his frequent public endorsements of the unique
contributions to mankind of Chinese civilization — in contrast to Chairman
                                          A Happy and Meaningful Occasion 89


Mao’s Cultural Revolution that was then ransacking the Mainland’s past, I
mentioned the opportunity that Chang Wejen’s recent return from Harvard
Law School presented for making a great leap forward in Taiwan’s research in
the nation’s legal history. Chang, who had met me as I arrived at Taipei airport
a few days earlier, was discouraged by the lack of response to his efforts to
find a legal history teaching job at the island’s law schools and had indicated
that Academia Sinica might be a more appropriate host for his research, a
suggestion that I passed to the President. On my next visit to Taiwan, I was
thrilled to visit the Institute of History and Philology to witness Chang Wejen
in action and become acquainted with the output of the productive research
team that he had assembled.
    During the long era of “White Terror” presided over by the Chiang
Kaishek family, research in imperial Chinese legal history was not perceived to
be as threatening as contemporary public law topics, which were not then
allowed to be freely pursued. The end of that era, as the newly-established
Institute of Law has demonstrated, made it possible to open up many formerly
restricted subjects to unfettered analysis. I hope that in its second decade the
Institute of Law will continue to build on these recent accomplishments in the
public law arena.
    Taiwan’s academic community does not need my advice about what
topics are most important to now pursue for domestic purposes. But I trust that
a few comments about the international significance of the Law Institute’s
future preoccupations will not be deemed out of line.
    First of all, it seems desirable for the Institute and other Taiwan scholars
to do much more to inform the world — in English — about Taiwan’s most
distinctive and important legal challenges and achievements of recent decades.
Not enough is known abroad, for example, about the operation and
accomplishments of what has come to be called the Constitutional Court. At a
time when judicial independence is increasingly under attack in countries that
are descending from democracy to autocracy, the Taiwan experience offers
     研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
90   THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY



welcome encouragement and stimulus. Similarly, efforts should be made to
publicize studies of the current efforts to come to grips with the complexities
of dealing with “transitional justice” that trouble all countries that are
struggling to securely emerge from dictatorial regimes.
     I hope that the Institute will also be able to deploy the resources necessary
for expanding its valuable studies of comparative law. Taiwan’s “New
Southbound Policy” highlights the possibilities for delving more deeply into
the legal systems of Southeast Asia and South Asia.
     Above all, the Institute should devote much greater attention to the
situation in China that it is uniquely positioned to analyze. Until now, Hong
Kong, despite its handover to China in 1997, has maintained a vibrant
academic community that has done great service to foreign understanding of
the momentous legal developments in the Mainland. Sadly, for the foreseeable
future, the many able legal experts in the Special Administrative Region who
have done such outstanding work will be subjected to growing pressures and
restrictions that will require the rest of us who study the Mainland to strive
harder to fill the gap being created. Taiwan scholars should be best qualified to
undertake this responsibility, and the Institute appears to be in a position to
lead the way.
     There are many reasons, of course, for China to become a more prominent
area of the Institute’s activities. Looking back at the history of another island
seeking to cope with a dynamic, continental neighbor, I recall that, as early as
the reign of Henry the Eighth, wise governors recognized that study of the
French and other European legal systems by scholars at Oxford, Cambridge
and other distinguished places of learning could offer invaluable insights into
the challenges before the country. To be sure, for legal scholars not only
national security is at stake. Contemporary China is an unprecedented
phenomenon that urgently warrants more, and more sophisticated, analysis by
the masters of many disciplines, not the least of which is law as sensitized by
the social and even natural sciences.
                                                 A Happy and Meaningful Occasion 91


      So many topics cry out for attention. In recent years my own
preoccupation has been the variety of coercive processes and pressures by
which the Communist Party and the state have sought to bend the will and
direct the energies of their people.1 Determined not to suffer the fate of the
Soviet system that spawned it, the Xi Jinping government has created new
legal institutions and practices that have embellished the Leninist model
imported by Chairman Mao. The National Supervision Commission
established in 2018 is the foremost illustration.2
      One fascinating study for which Taiwan experts are especially equipped
might be a comparison of the evolution of the criminal process in China with
that in Taiwan beginning with the imposition of the long nightmare of Chiang
Kaishek’s version of Leninism. In 2013 Margaret Lewis and I published a
study of Taiwan’s abolition of its infamous truncated judicial procedures for
punishing alleged “liumang” (hooligan) offenders. As we pointed out, this had
obvious implications for contemporary Chinese efforts to abolish, at least in
name, the extrajudicial punishment system of “re-education through labor”.3
      Yet it would be a mistake for the Institute to limits its focus to the
repressive aspects that underlie China’s progress. Law plays increasingly
important roles in the country’s economic and social development as well as in
its now totalitarian controls. Xi Jinping’s frequent calls for “the rule of law”


1
    See e.g., Jerome A. Cohen, “Rule of Law” with Chinese Characteristics: Evolution and
    Manipulation, 19 INT. J. CONST. LAW (forthcoming 2021); Jerome A. Cohen, Law’s Relation
    to Political Power in China: A Backward Transition, 86(1) SOC. RES.: AN INT’L Q. 231
    (2019) [hereinafter Cohen, Law’s Relation to Political Power in China]; Yu-Jie Chen &
    Jerome A. Cohen, Freedom from Arbitrary Detention in Asia: Lessons from China, Taiwan
    and Hong Kong, in OXFORD HANDBOOK OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW IN ASIA (David Law,
    Holning Lau & Alex Schwartz eds., forthcoming).
2
    See e.g., Cohen, Law’s Relation to Political Power in China, supra note 1; Jamie P.
    Horsley, What’s so controversial about China’s new anti-corruption body? Digging into the
    National Supervision Commission, THE DIPLOMAT (May 30, 2018), https://thediplomat.
    com/2018/05/whats-so-controversial-about-chinas-new-anti-corruption-body.
3
    See JEROME A. COHEN & MARGARET K. LEWIS, CHALLENGE TO CHINA: HOW TAIWAN
    ABOLISHED ITS VERSION OF RE-EDUCATION THROUGH LABOR (2013).
      研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
92    THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY



surely do not advocate “government under law” but rather “law under
government”. Despite continuing lawlessness on the part of the Party-state’s
ubiquitous police, Beijing’s legislative and administrative productivity and
judicial activity in many fields, including regulation of the nation’s intellectual
property and its new technology and industries, has been impressive and
deserves greater scrutiny.
       Given current measures to prevent transparency, evolving methods of
attempting to resolve disputes among the people and particularly between the
people and local governments are not easy to study, but the effort should be
made. Certainly the PRC’s energetic and overextended Belt and Road Initiative
has sparked the establishment of new Chinese legal institutions that are
somewhat more possible to research, although one should not overlook the
obstacles.
       The work of the Supreme People’s Court, striving for judicial reforms that
might inspire popular confidence especially in civil and economic matters,
while openly serving as the obedient instrument of the Party, offers further
opportunities for analysis. 4 The Institute should also not neglect the
transformation of education that has been less obviously taking place in the
nation’s more than six hundred law schools and that will profoundly influence
the future.
       I could go on and list the distinctive features of the PRC’s preaching and
practice regarding public international law5 as well as the currently suspended
role of law in cross-strait relations,6 but I hope that the point has been made.


4
     For example, Susan Finder’s blog, Supreme People’s Court Monitor, has done a great
     service by documenting and analyzing the activities of China Supreme People’s Court. See
     SUPREME PEOPLE’S COURT MONITOR, https://supremepeoplescourtmonitor.com (last visited
     Sept. 3, 2021).
5
     See Jerome A. Cohen, Law and Power in China’s International Relations, 52 N.Y.U. J.
     INT’L L. & POL. 123 (2020).
6
     See Yu-Jie Chen & Jerome A. Cohen, China-Taiwan Relations Re-Examined: The “1992
     Consensus” and Cross-Strait Agreements, 14 U. PA. ASIAN L. REV. 1 (2019).
                                           A Happy and Meaningful Occasion 93


    I am confident that, to the extent that in pursuit of its agenda the Institute
finds it useful to expand its cooperation with foreign counterparts and scholars,
it will meet with an enthusiastic response. I am glad to have been asked to
serve as a cheerleader of the future. Very best wishes to the Institute for the
coming decades.
     研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
94   THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY



                               References
Chen, Yu-Jie, and Jerome A. Cohen. 2019. China-Taiwan Relations Re-Examined:
     The ‘1992 Consensus’ and Cross-Strait Agreements. University of
     Pennsylvania Asian Law Review 14:1-40.
———. Forthcoming. Freedom from Arbitrary Detention in Asia: Lessons from
     China, Taiwan and Hong Kong. In Oxford Handbook of Constitutional Law
     in Asia, edited by David Law, Holning Lau and Alex Schwartz.
Cohen, Jerome A. 2019. Law’s Relation to Political Power in China: A Backward
     Transition. Social Research: An International Quarterly 86(1): 231-251.
———. 2020. Law and Power in China’s International Relations. New York
     University Journal of International Law and Politics 52:123-165.
———. Forthcoming 2021. “Rule of Law” with Chinese Characteristics:
     Evolution and Manipulation. International Journal of Constitutional
     Law 19.
Cohen, Jerome A., and Margaret K. Lewis. 2013. Challenge to China: How
     Taiwan Abolished Its Version of Re-Education Through Labor. Great
     Barrington, MA: Berkshire Publishing.
