      The Seminal Contributions of
      the Institutum Iurisprudentiae
     Academia Sinica to the Study of
            Judicial Behavior
                                                                   *




                                    Lee Epstein**




                                        Contents

    1. Theoretical Contributions                  1.3 “Thinking-Fast” Judging
       1.1 The Attitudinal Model               2. Substantive Contributions
       1.2 Strategic Accounts                  3. Methodological Contributions



      The analysis of judicial behavior is thriving. Once the sole province of US
scholars — and mostly political scientists at that — researchers throughout the
world are drawing on economics, history, law, psychology, and sociology to
analyze how and why judges make the choices they do. This is welcome news
because studies of judicial behavior are valuable in more ways than one. Not
only do they add to the store of knowledge on law and legal institutions; they
also provide guidance to policymakers about the possible effects of
institutional change on judges and their decisions, educate the public about

*
   Written to commemorate the 10th anniversary of the founding of Institutum Iurisprudentiae
   Academia Sinica.
**
   Ethan A.H. Shepley Distinguished University Professor, Washington University in St.
   Louis.
Online: http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/71518012.pdf;
        http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/71418012.pdf (Chinese version).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
126 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


how their courts work, help practicing lawyers develop winning strategies, and
even prompt judges to rethink their choices in light of unearthed biases.1
      The global growth in the study of judicial behavior traces, in no small
part, to researchers at the Institutum Iurisprudentiae Academia Sinica (IIAS).
By moving Taiwanese courts and judges to the fore, IIAS scholars have put to
the test ideas that had been assessed (mostly) in the USA and a handful of
other common law countries. Even more consequentially, IIAS research on
Taiwan has generated new insights that have proved illuminating for studies
on judging throughout the world.
      The upshot is that when it comes to the analysis of judicial behavior, the
IIAS has more than lived up to its founding goals of “breaking new ground
with the spirit of creativity” and “yielding first-rate, internationally
recognized scholarship”;2 it has surpassed them.
      No one essay could do justice to the many contributions of IIAS
scholars. For this reason, I limit my commentary to but a few of the
theoretical, substantive, and methodological breakthroughs that relate directly
to the study of judicial behavior.3

1. Theoretical Contributions
      Guiding work on judicial behavior is a range of theories, reflecting
different disciplinary traditions, as Table 1 shows.




1
    See generally RICHARD A. POSNER, HOW JUDGES THINK (2008); LEE EPSTEIN ET AL., THE
    BEHAVIOR OF FEDERAL JUDGES: A THEORETICAL AND EMPIRICAL STUDY OF RATIONAL
    CHOICE (2013); Andrew J. Wistrich et al., Heart Versus Head: Do Judges Follow the Law
    or Follow Their Feelings, 93 TEX. L. REV. 855 (2015) (all listing the benefits of studying
    judicial behavior).
2
    INSTITUTUM IURISPRUDENTIAE ACADEMIA SINICA, https://www.iias.sinica.edu.tw/en/intro
    duction (last visited Jun. 15, 2021).
3
    For the sake of inclusiveness, I also discuss relevant works by scholars from other institutes
    of Academia Sinica.
                      The Seminal Contributions of the Institutum Iurisprudentiae
                              Academia Sinica to the Study of Judicial Behavior 127


            Approach
     (Disciplinary Origin(s))                              Description
Attitudinal Model                     Judges’ votes reflect their ideological attitudes
(Political Science, Psychology)       toward case facts4
Legalism (strong version)             Judges “find” the meaning of legal rules through
(Law)                                 politically neutral methods5
“Thinking-Fast” Judging
                                      Judges rely on heuristics, intuitions, and the like
(Psychology, Behavioral
                                      to make fast decisions without much effort6
Economics)
Identity Accounts                     Judges’ biographies, personal characteristics,
(Psychology, Sociology)               and identities affect their choices7
                                      Judges are motivated and constrained by
Labor Market Model                    (mostly) non-pecuniary costs (e.g., effort,
(Economics)                           criticism) and benefits (e.g., esteem, influence,
                                      self-expression)8
                                      Judges are strategic actors who realize that their
                                      ability to achieve their goals depends on the
Strategic Accounts
                                      preferences of other actors, the choices they
(Economics, Political Science)
                                      expect others to make, and the institutional
                                      context in which they interact9
          TABLE 1. Six Approaches to the Study of Judicial Behavior10
Source: See supra note 10.


4
    Best articulated in JEFFREY A. SEGAL & HAROLD J. SPAETH, THE SUPREME COURT AND
    THE ATTITUDINAL MODEL REVISITED (2002), especially Chapters 3 and 8.
5
   Under a weaker version of legalism, “law” (broadly defined) constrains judges from acting
   on their personal preferences, intuitions, biases, and emotions.
6
   See generally DANIEL KAHNEMAN, THINKING, FAST AND SLOW (2011); RICHARD H. THALER,
   MISBEHAVING: THE MAKING OF BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS (2015).
7
   Examples include national identity (e.g., Eric A. Posner & Miguel F. P. de Figueiredo, Is
   the International Court of Justice Biased?, 34 J. LEGAL STUD. 599 (2005)); race (e.g., Adam
   Cox & Thomas J. Miles, Judging the Voting Rights Act, 108 COLUM L. REV. 1 (2008)),
   gender (e.g., Christina L. Boyd et al., Untangling the Causal Effects of Sex on Judging, 54
   AM. J. POL. SCI. 389 (2010)); and religion (Moses Shayo & Asaf Zussman, Judicial Ingroup
   Bias in the Shadow of Terrorism, 126 Q. J. ECON. 1447 (2011)).
8
   See, e.g., BENJAMIN ALARIE & ANDREW J. GREEN, COMMITMENT AND COOPERATION ON HIGH
   COURTS: A CROSS-COUNTRY EXAMINATION OF INSTITUTIONAL CONSTRAINTS ON JUDGES
   (2017); Richard A. Posner, What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same Thing
   Everybody Else Does), 3 SUP. CT. ECON. REV. 1 (1993).
9
   See LEE EPSTEIN & JACK KNIGHT, THE CHOICES JUSTICES MAKE (1998).
10
   See Adopted from LEE EPSTEIN & KEREN WEINSHALL, THE STRATEGIC ANALYSIS OF
   JUDICIAL BEHAVIOR: A COMPARATIVE PERSPECTIVE (2021).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
128 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


      IIAS scholars have made important contributions to each. Suffice it here
to highlight studies pertaining to three: the attitudinal model, thinking-fast
judging, and strategic accounts.11

1.1 The Attitudinal Model
      Under the “attitudinal model,” judges’ votes reflect their political
preferences toward the facts raised in cases — with political preferences
usually defined by the judges’ ideology or partisan identity. 12 Although
various versions of this model have been around in the USA for nearly a
century, the model continues to hold sway because political preferences, no
matter how measured, remain drivers of judicial decisions — and not just in
US courts. In virtually all studies that measure it, partisanship or ideology
affects judging on apex courts, whether in Chile,13 Norway,14 France,15 and
Spain,16 among many others.17
      I emphasize “virtually all” because several early studies suggested that


11
   For work relating to identity judging, see Yun-chien Chang & Geoffrey Miller, Do Judges
   Matter?, J. INST. & THEORETICAL ECON. (forthcoming). (finding that, among U.S. state
   justices, social identities (e.g., race, gender) have little effect on whether justices dissent and
   which kinds of authorities they reference, among other decisions). For work related to
   legalism, see Yun-chien Chang et al., Non-Pecuniary Damages for Defamation, Personal
   Injury, and Wrongful Death: An Empirical Analysis of Court Cases in Taiwan, 4 CHINESE J.
   COMP. L. 69 (2016) (showing that in Taiwanese courts “in concordance with the Supreme
   Court precedents, plaintiffs’ and defendants’ annual incomes are highly relevant to court-
   adjudicated pain and suffering damages for defamation”).
12
   See SEGAL & SPAETH, supra note 4.
13
   See Lydia B. Tiede, The Political Determinants of Judicial Dissent: Evidence from the
   Chilean Constitutional Tribunal, 8 EUR. POL. SCI. REV. 377 (2016).
14
   See GUNNAR GRENDSTAD ET AL., POLICY MAKING IN AN INDEPENDENT JUDICIARY: THE
   NORWEGIAN SUPREME COURT (2015).
15
   See Christoph Hönnige, The Electoral Connection: How the Pivotal Judge Affects
   Oppositional Success at European Constitutional Courts, 32 W. EUR. POL. 963 (2009).
16
   See Chris Hanretty, Dissent in Iberia: The Ideal Points of Justices on the Spanish and
   Portuguese Constitutional Tribunals, 51 EUR. J. POL. RES. 671 (2012).
17
   For a review, see Lee Epstein et al., The Role of Comparative Law in the Analysis of
   Judicial Behavior, AM. J. COMP. L. (forthcoming).
                      The Seminal Contributions of the Institutum Iurisprudentiae
                              Academia Sinica to the Study of Judicial Behavior 129


Taiwan Constitutional Court (TCC) justices were the exception to this general
finding; that they were not ideological or political in their decision making.18
IIAS researchers, Su, Ho, and Lin, however, conclusively demonstrate that this
initial finding was illusory. 19 Deploying a clever research strategy, which
focused on the justices’ opinion alignments in constitutional cases, the
researchers unearthed clear evidence of ideological voting. As they succinctly
summarize their findings: “All judges are political, and the TCC Justices are no
exceptions.”
     This is a very important study because it both builds on and adds to the
existing literature. Su and his colleagues considered not only the justices’
ideology — as suggested by the attitudinal model — but also the justices’
philosophy: whether or not they were restraintists, generally deferring to the
political branches. So defined, restraintism turned out to be a consequential
factor in certain kinds of TCC cases. I suspect the same holds in the US
Supreme Court, but that is an empirical matter worthy of assessment using the
approach proposed by the IIAS team.
     The Taiwan Constitutional Court study is hardly the only one that
researchers at Academia Sinica have conducted on the role of politics in
judicial decisions.20 Especially noteworthy is Wu’s research in an area where
political factors might expect to play a role — in vote-buying litigation (cases
in which someone has been accused of exchanging money or gifts for votes).21


18
   See Nuno Garoupa et al., Explaining Constitutional Review in New Democracies: The Case
   of Taiwan, 20 PAC. RIM L. & POL. J. 1 (2011); Lucia Dalla Pellegrina et al., Judicial Ideal
   Points in New Democracies: The Case of Taiwan, 7 NATIONAL TAIWAN U. L. REV. 123
   (2012).
19
   Yen-Tu Su et al., Are Taiwan Constitutional Court Justices Political? (2020) (Working
   paper) (on file with the authors).
20
   See, e.g., Chang & Miller, supra note 11, at 14 (finding that “that greater ideological spread
   between judges on a panel generates more dissents, which in turn generate longer opinions
   with more citations”).
21
   See Chung-Li Wu, Charge Me If You Can: Assessing Political Biases in Vote-buying
   Verdicts in Democratic Taiwan (2000-2010), 2012 CHINA Q. 786 (2012).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
130 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


Focusing on Taiwanese district courts, high courts, and the Supreme Court, Wu
found that political considerations, such as the partisanship of the defendant
and whether the candidate was elected, play less of a role than expected in the
disputes’ outcomes.
     Whether Wu’s findings transport to other societies is an interesting
question that Wu himself commends to other researchers. I concur with his
recommendation.

1.2 Strategic Accounts
     As Table 1 suggests, strategic accounts of judging contain three essential
components: (1) judges’ actions are directed toward the attainment of goals; (2)
judges are strategic or interdependent decision makers, meaning they realize
that to achieve their goals, they must consider the preferences and likely
actions of other relevant actors; and (3) institutions (formal and informal rules)
structure the judges’ interactions with these other actors.
     Some studies investigating strategic behavior center on the judges’
relations with their colleagues and judicial superiors.22 Nonetheless the bulk
of modern-day strategic work worldwide, I daresay, has focused on relations
between courts and external actors. This focus may reflect concerns among
judges, lawyers, and scholars alike about threats posed by governments to
courts in many societies.23 These days, politicians have not been reluctant to
take to social media to deride court decisions or even threaten particular
judges. 24 The rise of populism also has led to backlashes against both
international and domestic courts.25
     External strategic accounts speak to these concerns. They suggest that

22
   For a review of this literature, see EPSTEIN & WEINSHALL, supra note 10.
23
   See Bojan Bugaric & Tom Ginsburg, The Assault on Postcommunist Courts, 27 J.
   DEMOCRACY 69 (2016); Erik Voeten, Populism and Backlashes Against International
   Courts, 18 PERSP. ON POL. 407 (2020).
24
   E.g., Chris Krewson et al., Twitter and the Supreme Court: An Examination of
   Congressional Tweets about the Supreme Court, 39 JUST. SYS. J. 322 (2018).
25
   See Voeten, supra note 23.
                       The Seminal Contributions of the Institutum Iurisprudentiae
                               Academia Sinica to the Study of Judicial Behavior 131


judges must render efficacious rulings (those that members of their society will
respect and with which they will comply) if they are to achieve their goals,
whatever those goals may be. The accounts further identify various methods
available to judges to maximize the efficacy of their decisions26 — including
strategically timing them. The basic idea is that judges can adjust when they
issue decisions with an eye toward to staving off attacks and controversy, as
well as building their institution’s legitimacy.27
       Although this idea seems plausible, large-scale empirical evidence in its
support is quite limited.28 For this reason, a study by IIAS scholars Su and Ho
on the timing of decisions in the Taiwan Constitutional Court (TCC) is a very
welcome addition.29 Using a sophisticated statistical strategy, Su and Ho show
that the TCC tends to give priority to governmental petitions and to high-
profile cases — findings that refute the assumption that the “TCC usually
organizes its plenary docket on a first-come, first-serve.”
       Su and Ho conclude their study with these words:
     We suspect that strategic decision timing is not unique to the TCC; every
     Constitutional Court that has a rolling docket may just have to accept the
     fact that all cases are not created equal, and prioritize its plenary docket

26
   For a review, see Lee Epstein & Jack Knight, Efficacious Judging on Apex Courts, in
   COMPARATIVE JUDICIAL REVIEW 272 (Erin F. Delaney & Rosalind Dixon eds., 2018).
27
   See David Fontana, Docket Control and the Success of Constitutional Courts, in
   COMPARATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 624 (Tom Ginsburg & Rosalind Dixon eds., 2011);
   Erin F. Delaney, Analyzing Avoidance: Judicial Strategy in Comparative Perspective, 66
   DUKE L.J. 1 (2016).
28
   For exceptions, see Diego Werneck Arguelhes & Ivar A. Hartmann, Timing Control
   Without Docket Control: How Individual Justices Shape the Brazilian Supreme Court’s
   Agenda, 5 J.L. & CTS. 105 (2017) (establishing that Brazilian Supreme Court justices delay
   hearing a case or announcing a decision until the justices believe there is a more favorable
   political climate or a court more inclined to rule their way); and Lee Epstein et al., The Best
   for Last: The Timing of U.S. Supreme Court Decisions, 64 DUKE L.J. 991 (2015) (showing
   that the US Supreme Court issues its most important, controversial, and divisive decisions at
   the end of its term for “public-relations reasons”).
29
   Yen-Tu Su & Han-Wei Ho, Judging, Sooner or Later: A Study of Decision Timing in
   Taiwan’s Constitutional Court (2014) (Working paper) (on file with the authors).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
132 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


     on the basis of case importance — if it wants to do the right thing at the
     right time.
       Again, I agree; and again I trust that other scholars will build on Su and
Ho’s excellent work.

1.3 “Thinking-Fast” Judging
       Strategic accounts assume that the judge “is a rational maximizer of his
ends in life, his satisfactions…his ‘self-interest’.” 30 This is a reasonable
assumption, or at least one that gets us pretty far in understanding the choices
judges make. But it will not get us all the way there. It is just too late in the
day to question the “thinking-fast” approach to judging (see Table 1), which
amounts to decades’ worth of studies showing that in many situations, people
rely heavily on heuristics, intuitions, and the like to make fast decisions
without much effort. 31 These responses are not invariably wrong or even
unhelpful. 32 But in many circumstances fast thinking, unchecked by
deliberative assessments, can lead to mistakes and biased decisions, 33
enticing people “away from making optimal decisions in terms of utility
maximization.”34
       Although judges seem to believe that they are the exceptions to the rule —
that they can “suppress or convert” their biases, prejudices, and sympathies,
and the like into rational decisions35 — experiments conducted on thousands
of judges demonstrate otherwise. What the experiments show is that judges
respond more favorably to litigants they like or with whom they sympathize,36



30
   RICHARD A. POSNER, ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF LAW 3 (8th ed. 2011).
31
   See KAHNEMAN, supra note 6; THALER, supra note 6.
32
   See Wistrich et al., supra note 1.
33
   See KAHNEMAN, supra note 6; THALER, supra note 6.
34
   T.K. Das & Bing-Sheng Teng, Cognitive Biases and Strategic Decision Processes: An
   Integrative Perspective, 36 J. MGMT. STUD. 757 (1999).
35
   See Wistrich et al., supra note 1.
36
   See Wistrich et al., supra note 1.
                      The Seminal Contributions of the Institutum Iurisprudentiae
                              Academia Sinica to the Study of Judicial Behavior 133


fall prey to hindsight bias when assessing probable cause,37 “find” evidence to
confirm their beliefs,38 and favor insiders and disfavor outgroups.39
     Most scholars take the experimental evidence quite seriously, but
members of the legal community (especially judges) do not; they complain
that the experiments are artificial and so do not capture the real courtroom
environment. This critique counsels for observational studies — that is,
studies making use of data generated by judges in their workaday world, not
by researchers in their labs.
     Observational studies are not easy to do, but neither are they impossible,
as demonstrated by Chang, Chen, and Lin’s first-rate paper on the anchoring
effect (“a cognitive bias in which human decisions rely too much on the first
piece of information encountered, or other conspicuous, but irrelevant,
information in their consciousness”).40 Experiments establish that judges, like
most humans, fall prey to this bias; and Chang and his colleagues show the
experimental findings transport to the real world. In a clever analysis of
Taiwanese court decisions relating to compensation to landowners in trespass
disputes, the researchers find that the judges’ awards “are influenced by the
requests of the plaintiffs, that is, plaintiffs’ claims regarding the annual yield
rate of their land are an anchor for the judgment in an actual civil litigation
setting.”
     Because this finding meshes with experimental results, it is important in
its own right, for when the experimental and the observational converge, we
can have more confidence in the underlying theory. But the Chang, Chen,
and Lin study is consequential in another way: It shows that the anchoring


37
   See Jeffrey J. Rachlinski et al., Probable Cause, Probability, and Hindsight, 8 J. EMPIRICAL
   LEGAL STUD. 72 (2011).
38
   See Jeffrey J. Rachlinski et al., Contrition in the Courtroom: Do Apologies Affect
   Adjudication?, 98 CORNELL L. REV. 1189 (2013).
39
   See Wistrich et al., supra note 1.
40
   See Yun-chien Chang et al., Empirical Evidence of Anchoring Effect in Real Litigation
   (2019) (Working paper) (on file with the authors).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
134 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


effect can be offset if defendants “explicitly counter the claim rates, rather
than being silent about this issue.” In other words, when defendants counter, it
can serve as a “powerful debiaser” — a result that carries implications both for
lawyering and judging.

2. Substantive Contributions
     Falling under the rubric of “judicial behavior” are perhaps a dozen
substantive topics, including judicial independence, the selection and
retention of judges, access to judicial power, public opinion, and the role of
attorneys and litigants. 41 IIAS scholars have contributed to many of these
literatures but worthy of special emphasis is their research on attorneys and
litigants.
     In addition to their study on anchoring effects, Chang, Chen, and Lin
have produced important work on whether attorney experience affects pain and
suffering damages in cases litigated in Taiwanese courts.42 Their finding that
experienced plaintiff attorneys tend to claim higher damages (thereby setting
the anchor higher than novice attorneys) fits compatibly with literature
showing that experience matters in litigation.43 But Chang, Chen, and Lin go
further and attempt to identify the mechanism — that is, why does attorney
experience matter? Their answer is that “senior and junior attorneys have


41
   For a review of work on these and other topics, see Lee Epstein, Some Thoughts on the
   Study of Judicial Behavior, 57 WM. & MARY L. REV. 2017 (2016).
42
   Yun-chien Chang, Kong-Pin Chen, & Chang-Ching Lin, Knowledge in Youth is Wisdom in
   Age: An Empirical Study of Attorney Experience in Torts Litigation, 63(105913) INT’L REV.
   L. & ECON. 1, 1-12 (2020).
43
   E.g., David S. Abrams & Albert H. Yoon, The Luck of the Draw: Using Random Case
   Assignment to Investigate Attorney Ability, 74 U. CHI. L. REV. 1145 (2007); Catherine T.
   Harris et al., Does Being a Repeat Player Make a Difference? The Impact of Attorney
   Experience and Case-Picking on the Outcome of Medical Malpractice Lawsuits, 8 YALE J.
   HEALTH POL’Y L. & ETHICS 253 (2008); Michael Nelson & Lee Epstein, Human Capital in
   Court: The Role of Attorney Experience in U.S. Supreme Court Litigation, J.L. & CTS
   (forthcoming).
                      The Seminal Contributions of the Institutum Iurisprudentiae
                              Academia Sinica to the Study of Judicial Behavior 135


different business models”:
     Experienced attorneys are more likely to have a firmer client base. With a
     longer track record and reputation, their business is to a lesser extent
     influenced by an increase in average court fee percentage. Senior
     attorneys thus are more willing to make bolder claims than junior
     colleagues. If this explanation holds, attorney experience is better
     understood as a proxy for practice stability. Attorneys make bolder claims
     because their practice is less likely to be affected by a few losses.44
       In an equally terrific study, Huang, Chin, and Lin explore the relative
effectiveness of criminal defense counsel by taking advantage of a 2003 reform
in Taiwan.45 Under that reform defendants who could not afford a lawyer were
randomly assigned to one of two types of counsel: public defenders or legal aid
attorneys. The study’s findings are fascinating. It turns out that both attorney
types are “equally effective,” but they “adopt different litigation strategies”
that affect the fate of their clients: “the defendants represented by public
defenders tend to have higher conviction rates, but shorter sentences if they are
convicted.”
       Moving to litigants, IIAS researchers have contributed mightily to the
rather large literature that derives from Galanter’s famous article, “Why the
‘Haves’ Come Out Ahead.”46 The basic idea is that well-resourced litigants
(the “haves”) are more successful in court than the “have-nots” (or “one-
shotters”) by virtue of their experience and expertise.
       Research coming out of Academia Sinica on Taiwanese courts has mostly
supported this hypothesis, while offering some interesting twists. Chen, Huang,
and Lin, for example, find that some haves — especially the government —
do, in fact, come out ahead of lower-status litigants in civil cases in the Taiwan

44
   See Chang et al., supra note 42.
45
   See Kuo-Chang Huang et al., Does the Type of Criminal Defense Counsel Affect Case
   Outcomes?: A Natural Experiment in Taiwan, 30 INT’L REV. L. & ECON. 113 (2010).
46
   See Marc Galanter, Why the “Haves” Come Out Ahead: Speculations on the Limits of Legal
   Change, 9 LAW & SOC’Y REV. 95 (1974).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
136 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


Supreme Court (TSC). 47 The reason, though, may have less to do with
resources than with the TSC judges’ predisposition to view themselves as part
of the government. Then, in an article that explores public-land usurpation trial
decisions in Taiwan’s district courts, Wu finds that the Galanter hypothesis
mostly holds in civil cases but not for probationary verdicts in criminal cases,
in which “the effects of resource factors on trial outcomes are considerably less
than expected.”48

3. Methodological Contributions
     Many of the IIAS studies referenced so far contribute to the scientific
advancement of the analysis of judicial behavior. Especially impressive is the
attention IIAS researchers have drawn to the obstacles of making causal
inferences with observational data, as well as the clever designs they have
devised to overcome them.49
     Almost needless to write, implementing those designs requires high-
quality data and, on this score, IIAS scholars have truly proved their mettle. In
study after study, they have compiled original and remarkably rich datasets of
litigation in Taiwan, at all court levels. Noteworthy, in particular, is the IIAS
Taiwan Constitutional Court (TCC) Database, which houses all kinds of
interesting data on decisions of the TCC. Not only have IIAS scholars put this



47
   See Kong-Pin Chen et al., Party Capability versus Court Preference: Why do the “Haves”
   Come Out Ahead?—An Empirical Lesson from the Taiwan Supreme Court, 31 J.L. ECON. &
   ORG. 93 (2015).
48
   See Chung-Li Wu, Do the “Haves” Come Out Ahead? Resource Disparity in Public-Land
   Usurpation Litigation in Taiwan, 100 SOC. SCI. Q. 1215 (2019). See also Chung-Li Wu,
   Assessing the Effects of Political Factors on Court Decisions in Corruption Litigation in
   Taiwan, 59 ASIAN SURV. 295 (2019).
49
   See, e.g., Huang et al., supra note 45 (exploiting a Taiwan reform to study criminal defense
   lawyers, as described in the text); and Chang, Chen & Lin, supra note 42 (using cutting-
   edge methods to ensure balance on observed covariates between experienced and novice
   attorneys).
                        The Seminal Contributions of the Institutum Iurisprudentiae
                                Academia Sinica to the Study of Judicial Behavior 137


Database to great use, producing many excellent papers;50 but the Database
itself is a valuable product, joining only a handful of others worldwide. With
these kinds of foundational datasets in hand, scholars can truly meet the
promise of the study of judicial behavior — whether educating the public,
informing policy making and lawyers, and prompting judges to consider how
various biases seep into their decisions.

                                           *********
       At the outset I noted that IIAS researchers have played a large role in
spurring the worldwide growth of the analysis of judicial behavior. Their
contributions over the last decade have been creative, powerful, and
consequential. No doubt their work over the next ten years and beyond will be
equally as important; and equally without doubt IIAS research will help ensure
that the best days for the analysis of judicial behavior are yet to come.




50
     See, e.g., Su et al., supra note 19; Su & Ho, supra note 29.
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
138 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


                             References
Abrams, David S., and Albert H. Yoon. 2007. The Luck of the Draw: Using
    Random Case Assignment to Investigate Attorney Ability. University of
    Chicago Law Review 74:1145-1177.
Alarie, Benjamin, and Andrew J. Green. 2017. Commitment and Cooperation on
    High Courts: A Cross-Country Examination of Institutional Constraints on
    Judges. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Arguelhes, Diego Werneck, and Ivar A. Hartmann. 2017. Timing Control
    without Docket Control: How Individual Justices Shape the Brazilian
    Supreme Court’s Agenda. Journal of Law and Court 5:105-140.
Boyd, Christina L., Lee Epstein, and Andrew D. Martin. 2010. Untangling the
    Causal Effects of Sex on Judging. American Journal of Political Science
    54:389-414.
Bugaric, Bojan, and Tom Ginsburg. 2016. The Assault on Postcommunist
    Courts. Journal of Democracy 27:69-82.
Chang, Yun-chien, and Geoffrey Miller. Forthcoming. Do Judges Matter?.
    Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics.
Chang, Yun-chien, Han-Wei Ho, and Jimmy Chia-Shin Hsu. 2016. Non-
    Pecuniary Damages for Defamation, Personal Injury, and Wrongful Death:
    An Empirical Analysis of Court Cases in Taiwan. The Chinese Journal of
    Comparative Law 4:69-97.
Chang, Yun-chien, Kong-Pin Chen, and Chang-Ching Lin. 2019. Empirical
    Evidence of Anchoring Effect in Real Litigation. Working paper.
———. 2020. Knowledge in Youth is Wisdom in Age: An Empirical Study of
    Attorney Experience in Torts Litigation. International Review of Law and
    Economics 63(105913):1-12.
Chen, Kong-Pin, Kuo-Chang Huang, and Chang-Ching Lin. 2015. Party
    Capability versus Court Preference: Why Do the “Haves” Come Out
    Ahead? — An Empirical Lesson from the Taiwan Supreme Court. Journal
    of Law, Economics and Organization 31:93-126.
                  The Seminal Contributions of the Institutum Iurisprudentiae
                          Academia Sinica to the Study of Judicial Behavior 139


Cox, Adam, and Thomas J. Miles. 2008. Judging the Voting Rights Act.
    Columbia Law Review 108:1-54.
Das, T.K., and Bing-Sheng Teng. 1999. Cognitive Biases and Strategic Decision
    Processes: An Integrative Perspective. Journal of Management Studies
    36:757-778.
Delaney, Erin F. 2016. Analyzing Avoidance: Judicial Strategy in Comparative
    Perspective. Duke Law Journal 66:1-67.
Epstein, Lee. 2016. Some Thoughts on the Study of Judicial Behavior. William
    & Mary Law Review 57:2017-2073.
Epstein, Lee, and Jack Knight. 1998. The Choices Justices Make. Washington,
    D.C.: CQ Press.
———. 2018. Efficacious Judging on Apex Courts. Pp. 272-289 in Comparative
    Judicial Review, edited by Erin F. Delaney and Rosalind Dixon.
    Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Epstein, Lee, and Keren Weinshall. 2021. The Strategic Analysis of Judicial
    Behavior: A Comparative Perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge University
    Press.
Epstein, Lee, Urkša Šadl, and Keren Weinshall. Forthcoming. The Role of
    Comparative Law in the Analysis of Judicial Behavior. American Journal
    of Comparative Law.
Epstein, Lee, William M. Landes, and Richard A. Posner. 2013. The Behavior of
    Federal Judges: A Theoretical and Empirical Study of Rational Choice.
    Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———. 2015. The Best for Last: The Timing of U.S. Supreme Court Decisions.
    Duke Law Journal 64:991-1022.
Fontana, David. 2011. Docket Control and the Success of Constitutional Courts.
    Pp. 624-642 in Comparative Constitutional Law, edited by Tom Ginsburg
    and Rosalind Dixon. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Galanter, Marc. 1974. Why the “Haves” Come Out Ahead: Speculations on the
    Limits of Legal Change. Law and Society Review 9:95-160.
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
140 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


Garoupa, Nuno, Veronica Grembi, and Shirley Ching-ping Lin. 2011.
    Explaining Constitutional Review in New Democracies: The Case of
    Taiwan. Pacific Rim Law and Policy Journal 20:1-40.
Grendstad, Gunnar, William R. Shaffer, and Eric N. Waltenburg. 2015. Policy
    Making in an Independent Judiciary: The Norwegian Supreme Court.
    Colchester: ECPR Press.
Hanretty, Chris. 2012. Dissent in Iberia: The Ideal Points of Justices on the
    Spanish and Portuguese Constitutional Tribunals. European Journal of
    Political Research 51:671-692.
Harris, Catherine T., Ralph Peeples, and Thomas B. Metzloff. 2008. Does Being
    a Repeat Player Make a Difference? The Impact of Attorney Experience
    and Case-Picking on the Outcome of Medical Malpractice Lawsuits. Yale
    Journal of Health Policy, Law, and Ethics 8:253-282.
Hönnige, Christoph. 2009. The Electoral Connection: How the Pivotal Judge
    Affects Oppositional Success at European Constitutional Courts. Western
    European Politics 32:963-984.
Huang, Kuo-Chang, Kong-Pin Chen, and Chang-Ching Lin. 2010. Does the
    Type of Criminal Defense Counsel Affect Case Outcomes?: A Natural
    Experiment in Taiwan. International Review of Law and Economics
    30:113-127.
Kahneman, Daniel. 2011. Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York, NY: Farrar,
    Straus and Giroux.
Krewson, Chris, David Lassen, and Ryan J. Owens. 2018. Twitter and the
    Supreme Court: An Examination of Congressional Tweets about the
    Supreme Court. Justice System Journal 39:322-330.
Nelson, Michael, and Lee Epstein. Forthcoming. Human Capital in Court: The
    Role of Attorney Experience in U.S. Supreme Court Litigation. Journal of
    Law and Courts.
                  The Seminal Contributions of the Institutum Iurisprudentiae
                          Academia Sinica to the Study of Judicial Behavior 141


Pellegrina, Lucia Dalla, Nuno Garoupa, and Shirley Ching-Ping Lin. 2012.
     Judicial Ideal Points in New Democracies: The Case of Taiwan. National
     Taiwan University Law Review 7:123-165.
Posner, Eric A., and Miguel F.P. de Figueiredo. 2005. Is the International Court
     of Justice Biased?. Journal of Legal Studies 34:599-630.
Posner, Richard A. 1993. What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same
     Thing Everybody Else Does). Supreme Court Economic Review 3:1-41.
———. 2008. How Judges Think. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———. 2011. Economic Analysis of Law. 8th ed. New York, NY: Aspen.
Rachlinski, Jeffrey J., Chris Guthrie, and Andrew J. Wistrich. 2011. Probable
     Cause, Probability, and Hindsight. Journal of Empirical Legal Studies
     8:72-98.
———. 2013. Contrition in the Courtroom: Do Apologies Affect Adjudication?.
     Cornell Law Review 98:1189-1243.
Segal, Jeffrey A., and Harold J. Spaeth. 2002. The Supreme Court and the
     Attitudinal Model Revisited. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Shayo, Moses, and Asaf Zussman. 2011. Judicial Ingroup Bias in the Shadow of
     Terrorism. Quarterly Journal of Economics 126:1447-1484.
Su, Yen-Tu, and Han-Wei Ho. 2014. Judging, Sooner or Later: A Study of
     Decision Timing in Taiwan’s Constitutional Court. Working paper.
Su, Yen-Tu, Han-Wei Ho, and Chien-Chih Lin. 2020. Are Taiwan
     Constitutional Court Justices Political?. Working paper.
Thaler, Richard H. 2015. Misbehaving: The Making of Behavioral Economics.
     New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company.
Tiede, Lydia B. 2016. The Political Determinants of Judicial Dissent: Evidence
     from the Chilean Constitutional Tribunal. European Political Science
     Review 8:377-403.
Voeten, Erik. 2020. Populism and Backlashes against International Courts.
     Perspectives on Politics 18:407-422.
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
142 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


Wistrich, Andrew J., Jeffrey J. Rachlinski, and Chris Guthrie. 2015. Heart
    Versus Head: Do Judges Follow the Law or Follow Their Feelings. Texas
    Law Review 93:855-924.
Wu, Chung-Li. 2012. Charge Me If You Can: Assessing Political Biases in
    Vote-buying Verdicts in Democratic Taiwan (2000-2010). China Quarterly
    211:786-805.
———. 2019. Assessing the Effects of Political Factors on Court Decisions in
    Corruption Litigation in Taiwan. Asian Survey 59:295-314.
———. 2019. Do the “Haves” Come Out Ahead? Resource Disparity in Public-
    Land Usurpation Litigation in Taiwan. Social Science Quarterly
    100:1215-1227.
