          Modernization as a Judicial
            Function in East Asia
                                  Chien-Chih Lin*




                                        Contents

    I. Foreword                                      4. Criminal Code: Adultery
    II. Modernization as a Judicial                  5. Summary
        Function                                  C. Judicial Engagement
       A. Establishment of Special                D. Objections of Modernization
          Courts                                     as a Judicial Function
          1. Constitutional Courts             III. Some Normative Implications
          2. Economic Courts                      A. From Transplantation to
       B. Contents of Judicial Decisions             Indigenization
          1. Civil Code: Marriage and             B. Living Constitutionalism
             Parental Rights                      C. Not a Hollow Hope?
          2. Civil Code: Inheritance           IV. Conclusion
          3. Administrative Law




I. Foreword
     Although the judiciary is dubbed the least dangerous branch,1 scholars
has already pointed out that the traditional prototype of court is not always

*
   Associate Research Professor, Institutum Iurisprudentiae, Academia Sinica,
   Taiwan. Email: chienchihlin@gate.sinica.edu.tw.
1
   See The Federalist No. 78 (Alexander Hamilton).
Online: http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/21518012.pdf.
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
640 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


realistic and adjudication is by no means the only judicial function.2 In fact,
courts nowadays exercise not only the power of judicial review, but also a host
of ancillary powers, such as the power to supervise elections, to impeach
presidents, or to dissolve political parties.3 Wielding so many powers, courts
not only adjudicate, but also shoulder other functions, such as regime
enforcement, social control, coordination, upholding democracy, reducing
agency cost, and facilitating economic growth and foreign investment.4 This is
true even in authoritarian regimes where the judiciary is seen as impotent more
often than not.5 It is fair to say that the judiciary has become increasingly
influential in an era of global judicialization of politics.6
     Yet the list of judicial functions mentioned above is neither exhaustive nor
universal. On the one hand, it is reasonable to assume that courts around the
globe actually play distinct functions. Given the historical, economic, and
cultural variances, there is no reason to believe that courts in nascent
democracies play an identical role as their counterparts in fully-fledged ones,
or that courts in developed states value economic growth as much as courts in
developing countries. In a word, each court has its own agenda. On the other


2
    See MARTIN M. SHAPIRO, COURTS: A COMPARATIVE AND POLITICAL ANALYSIS 1-36 (1981).
3
    See NUNO GAROUPA & TOM GINSBURG, JUDICIAL REPUTATION: A COMPARATIVE THEORY 75-
    97 (2015); Tom Ginsburg, Beyond Judicial Review: Ancillary Powers of Constitutional
    Courts, in INSTITUTIONS & PUBLIC LAW: COMPARATIVE APPROACHES 225, 230-39 (Tom
    Ginsburg & Robert A. Kagan eds., 2005); SAMUEL ISSACHAROFF, FRAGILE DEMOCRACIES:
    CONTESTED POWER IN THE ERA OF CONSTITUTIONAL COURTS 199-212 (2015).
4
    KEITH E. WHITTINGTON, POLITICAL FOUNDATIONS OF JUDICIAL SUPREMACY: THE
    PRESIDENCY, THE SUPREME COURT, AND CONSTITUTIONAL LEADERSHIP IN U.S.
    HISTORY 105-60 (2007).
5
    See Tamir Moustafa & Tom Ginsburg, Introduction: The Functions of Courts in
    Authoritarian Politics, in RULE BY LAW: THE POLITICS OF COURTS IN AUTHORITARIAN
    REGIMES 1, 4-11 (Tom Ginsburg & Tamir Moustafa eds., 2008); Kevin Y. L. Tan, As
    Efficient as the Best Business: Singapore’s Judicial System, in ASIAN COURTS IN CONTEXT
    228, 256-59 (Jiunn-Rong Yeh & Wen-Chen Chang eds., 2014).
6
    See generally RAN HIRSCHL, TOWARDS JURISTOCRACY: THE ORIGINS AND CONSEQUENCES OF
    THE NEW CONSTITUTIONALISM (2004); C NEAL TATE & TORBJORN VALLINDER EDS , THE
    GLOBAL EXPANSION OF JUDICIAL POWER (1995).
                                 Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 641


hand, the judiciary may play disparate functions at different times even in the
same country. This is particularly evident in countries that have experienced
dramatic social and economic change in the past several decades, such as
China.7 All these suggest that judicial functions vary in divergent contexts.
      From the perspective of East Asian jurisdictions, this paper suggests that
modernization is one vital function of the judiciary in this region that had
historically been plagued with colonialism and imperialism. 8 Before
modernization, people here lived a traditional life in which customs or
customary laws that were regarded from the Western viewpoints as “backward”
or “brutal” govern. This led to a constellation of unequal treatments imposed
by advanced countries, and, worse still, colonization. Facing this catastrophe,
many East Asian countries chose to adopt Western legal systems in exchange
for the repeal of unequal treaties or extraterritorial jurisdictions. Nonetheless,
law does not speak for itself. During the process of decolonization and
industrialization, the judiciary plays a critical role in stimulating, mirroring,
and consolidating the achievement of modernization. And this function remains
even to date. 9 The case of Taiwan vividly demonstrates the role of the
judiciary during the process of modernization. Historically, Taiwan has been
colonized by various powers, such as the Netherlands and Japan. At that time,


7
    See Chien-Chih Lin, Constitutions and courts in Chinese authoritarian regimes: China and
    pre-democratic Taiwan in comparison, 14 INT’L J. CONST. L. 351, 351-77 (2016).
8
    For the purpose of this paper, legal modernization refers to legal Westernization that is
    rooted in enlightenment, rationalism, individualism, and so forth. See TAY-SHEN WANG, THE
    PROCESS OF LEGAL MODERNIZATION IN TAIWAN: FROM “THE EXTENSION OF MAINLAND” TO
    “INDEPENDENT RECEPTION” 9-10 (2015). The term “Westernization” is, of course,
    contentious and imprecise to some extent. Holning Lau, The Language of Westernization in
    Legal Commentary, 61 AM. J. COMP. L. 507 (2013).
9
    To be sure, the debate on law and development, and its applicability in the context of
    Northeastern Asia is not beyond doubt. John K.M. Ohnesorge, Law and Development
    Orthodoxies and the Northeast Asian Experience, in LAW AND DEVELOPMENT IN ASIA 9, 9-
    25 (Gerald Paul McAlinn & Caslav Pejovic eds., 2012). Nonetheless, the idea of
    modernization involves not only legal and economic development, but also social and
    cultural change.
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
642 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


Taiwan was seen as either a trading post or an agricultural base for the interests
of the colonizers. After the defeat of the Chinese Civil War, the Nationalist
Party (KMT) fled to Taiwan, which has modernized economically,10 politically,
and constitutionally in the next several decades.11 During the process, the
Constitutional Court has used its ruling and reasoning to help modernize the
former agricultural authoritarian regime imbued with Confucianism.
     More importantly, modernization as a judicial function is not peculiar to
Taiwan, but rather a common characteristic of the judiciary in East Asia. After
World War II, many former colonies have declared independence and
transformed from agricultural societies to industrial states. This change is
usually attributed to the political branches, but the role of the judiciary should
not be ignored. One former Justice of Japanese Supreme Court told that that
the Supreme Court has a responsibility to adapt Japan to changing times, when
the political branches fail to do so.12 Indeed, due to the history of unequal
treaties that had been imposed upon Japan and other Asian countries since the
19th century, many Asian courts have used their decisions to both convince
foreigners that domestic legal system is not barbaric.13 One telling example
may be the Otsu incident of 1891 in which a Japanese policeman attempted to
murder a Russian prince.14 To further analyze this judicial function that has
not received enough scholarly attention, the rest of this paper proceeds as
follows: section II articulates the function of modernization from the three
dimensions. In Section III, this paper suggests that this understanding of


10
   See Alice H. Amsden, Taiwan’s Economic History: A Case of Etatisme and a Challenge to
   Dependency Theory, 5 MOD. CHINA 341 (1979).
11
   See JIUNN-RONG YEH, THE CONSTITUTION OF TAIWAN: A CONTEXTUAL ANALYSIS (2016).
12
   See Koji Miyakawa, Inside the Supreme Court of Japan ─ From the Perspective of a
   Former Justice, 15 ASIAN-PAC. L. & POL’Y J. 196, 208 (Mark A. Levin & Megumi Honami
   Lachapelle trans., 2014).
13
   See Tom Ginsburg, Studying Japanese Law Because It’s There, 58 AM. J. COMP. L. 15, 19-
   21 (2010); Moustafa & Ginsburg, supra note 5, at 6.
14
   See Lynn Berat, The Role of Conciliation in the Japanese Legal System, 8 AM. U. J. INT’L L.
   REV. 125, 143 (1992).
                              Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 643


modernization as a judicial function may shed new light on some old issues,
such as living constitutionalism, constitutional engagement, and the rise and
fall of judicial power. Section IV is the concluding remark.

II. Modernization as a Judicial Function
     Conventional wisdom has long held that, with neither the purse nor the
sword, the judiciary is unlikely to bring about social change unilaterally.15
Cooperating with its coordinate branches, however, it may still facilitate if not
precipitate modernization. Specifically, the function of modernization is most
evident in three domains: 1) the establishment of special courts, including but
not limited to constitutional courts and commercial courts; 2) the ruling of
judicial decisions, in which the judiciary often seeks to strike a balance
between law and custom; and 3) judicial borrowing, a process in which
domestic judges engage with either foreign or international precedents and
laws.

A. Establishment of Special Courts
     Institutionally speaking, scholars in East Asia have pointed out that
“[m]odernization in Asia has involved — to varying degrees — the adoption of
Western legal and judicial systems.”16 To be sure, not every new court is
created for the same reason, but the emergence of some special tribunals, such
as constitutional courts and economic courts, usually demonstrate a country’s
decisiveness to transform itself from a primal state to a modernized country.
This trend is increasingly clear with the spread of globalization, which
contributes to the convergence of not only economic regulations but also
constitutional frameworks.

15
   See GERALD N. ROSENBERG, THE HOLLOW HOPE: CAN COURTS BRING ABOUT SOCIAL
   CHANGE? (2d ed. 2008).
16
   Jiunn-Rong Yeh & Wen-Chen Chang, Introduction: Asian Courts in Context: Tradition,
   Transition and Globalization, in ASIAN COURTS IN CONTEXT 1, 52 (Jiunn-Rong Yeh &
   Wen-Chen Chang eds., 2014).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
644 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


     1. Constitutional Courts
       To begin with, democratization usually goes hand in hand with judicial
reform around the globe. Many nascent democracies have established
constitutional courts or human rights tribunals in order to demonstrate their
willingness to break up with the past in two senses. First, these countries
usually have horrible human rights records during the authoritarian periods in
which innocent people are brutally silenced, oppressed, and slaughtered. After
political liberation, new governments will often rewrite new constitutions in
order to protect fundamental rights and seek justice. To achieve these goals,
they will also establish constitutional tribunals as new guardians of the
constitutions to convince both domestic supporters and foreign observers that
the constitutions are not merely parchment barriers.17 In fact, scholars have
argued that constitutional courts are created in the period of transformation to
signal and facilitate democratic transition.18 Second, these constitutional tribunals
are usually established outside the traditional judicial hierarchy since old
courts are either impotent or untrustworthy to deal with politically sensitive
issues, such as restorative justice. What is worse, old courts are claws of the
dictators in the past more often than not.19 Establishing a brand new constitutional
court helps to rebuild people’s confidence toward the judiciary and the
governments. In addition to structural renovation, politicians usually appoint
judges of constitutional courts through a variety of political mechanisms. This
may guarantee that judges of constitutional tribunals embrace similar
ideologies and visions with them.
       The Constitutional Court of Korea is a good example here. Before 1987, it
was either the Supreme Court or the Constitutional Committee that exercised

17
   See Andrew Harding et al., Constitutional Courts: Forms, Functions and Practice in
   Comparative Perspective, in CONSTITUTIONAL COURTS: A COMPARATIVE STUDY 1, 5
   (Andrew Harding & Peter Leyland eds., 2009).
18
   See Ruti Teitel, Transitional Jurisprudence: The Role of Law in Political Transformation,
   106 YALE L.J. 2009, 2016, 2031-32 (2009).
19
   Harding, supra note 17, at 13.
                               Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 645


the power of judicial review in South Korea.20 Both institutions, unsurprisingly,
did not function actively in this regard. After democratization, therefore,
Korean politicians establish the Constitutional Court of Korea to adjudicate
human rights cases, and its performance has been highly acclaimed since
inception. Another example is the creation of the Indonesian Ad Hoc Human
Rights Court, which “is a direct consequence of events in East Timor in
1999.”21 From a global perspective, this happens not only in Asian countries;
many Central and Eastern European countries have created constitutional
courts and judicial review with an eye to “Westernize” their judicial system.22
All these instances indicate that founding a constitutional court seems to be a
common strategy to rebuild and modernize a country from the authoritarian
ashes.

     2. Economic Courts
      As mentioned above, one critical function of the judiciary is to provide
credible   commitments       in   economic      sphere.    During     the   process    of
modernization, many countries face the challenge of economic transformation
in addition to political liberation. Although not without controversy, law is
seen as an instrument to stimulate development by facilitating innovation and
private decision-making.23 Moreover, regional and international legal frameworks
have become increasingly influential in shaping a country’s domestic legal
order, notwithstanding some pushback. 24 Simply adopting foreign or

20
   TOM GINSBURG, JUDICIAL REVIEW IN NEW DEMOCRACIES: CONSTITUTIONAL COURTS IN
   ASIAN CASES 210-13 (2003).
21
   See Mark Cammack, The Indonesian Human Rights Court, in NEW COURTS IN ASIA 178,
   179-82 (Andrew Harding & Penelope Nicholson eds., 2010).
22
   See WOJCIECH SADURSKI, RIGHTS BEFORE COURTS: A STUDY OF CONSTITUTIONAL COURTS IN
   POSTCOMMUNIST STATES OF CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPE, at xi-xii (2d ed. 2014).
23
   See David M. Trubek, Introduction: Law and Development in the Twenty-first Century, in
   LAW AND DEVELOPMENT IN ASIA 1, 2-3 (Gerald Paul McAlinn & Caslav Pejovic eds., 2012).
24
   See John Gillespie & Randall Peerenboom, Pushing Back on Globalization: An Introduction
   to Regulation in Aisa, in REGULATION IN ASIA: PUSHING BACK ON GLOBALIZATION 1, 8-10
   (John Gillespie & Randall Peerenboom eds., 2009).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
646 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


international rules is not enough to guarantee economic growth, however.
Some international organizations will require member states to establish
judicial or quasi-judicial institutions. The trend of globalization and the need to
participate in World Trade Organization (or its predecessor GATT) prompt
many countries to implement judicial reforms. As a corollary, economic courts,
including commercial courts and intellectual property courts are founded as
part of the reform project to precipitate modernization by enhancing judicial
efficiency and capability in the domain of economic affairs.
     China is a lucid example of how a country modernize itself by
establishing new courts. Since the reform and opening policy, China has made
a great stride in economic growth. To comply with the Agreement on Trade-
Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, China has established three
intellectual property courts in Beijing, Shanghai, and Guangzhou, making its
promise to protect intellectual property and combat piracy more credible.25
Similar development takes place in Thailand, where the Central Intellectual
Property and International Trade Court is established based on exactly the
same reason.26 Furthermore, the 1998 Asian financial crisis further gave birth
to some special courts in Asian countries under the pressure of International
Monetary Fund (IMF) as an exchange for monetary support. Indonesian
Commercial Court was created under the pressure of the IMF to solve the
insolvency problems.27 All three examples clearly demonstrate the impact of
modernization and internationalization upon the founding of a new court.
     Note that the courts mentioned above do not exhaust all the specialized

25
   See Connie Carter, Specialized Intellectual Property Courts in the People’s Republic of
   China: Myth or Reality?, in NEW COURTS IN ASIA 101, 101-02 (Andrew Harding &
   Penelope Nicholson eds., 2010).
26
   See Pawat Satayanurug & Nattaporn Nakornin, Courts in Thailand: Progressive
   Development as the Country’s Pillar of Justice, in ASIAN COURTS IN CONTEXT 407, 419
   (Jiunn-Rong Yeh & Wen-Chen Chang eds., 2014).
27
   See David K. Linnan, ‘Reading the Tea Leaves’ in the Indonesian Commercial Court: A
   Cautionary Tale, but for Whom?, in NEW COURTS IN ASIA 56, 56 (Andrew Harding &
   Penelope Nicholson eds., 2010).
                              Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 647


courts founded in response to the need of modernization. The concept of
modernization     includes   not      only   political   liberation   and   economic
development, but also societal transformation of customs and traditions.
During the process of modernization, many old ideologies, such as patriarchy
and patrilineage, have faced serious challenges. As a result, many countries
have set up family or juvenile courts to tackle these issues. Moreover,
economic    development      itself   creates   some     new    problems,   such   as
environmental pollution, that need to be addressed. Bangladesh, for example,
has established environmental courts to try environmental offenses.28 More
importantly, the founding of new courts is not the only dimension of
modernization as a judicial function. Even for those countries that choose to
tackle these issues in traditional civil or administrative courts, the contents of
judicial decisions sometimes contribute to the modernization of a country more
directly and clearly.

B. Contents of Judicial Decisions
     In terms of the relationship between law and society, some suggest that
law is “determined and shaped by current mores and opinions of society” and
can “do nothing except codify custom.” 29 Others argue that law is an
instrument for social engineering and can induce social change.30 Despite the
two extreme views, many scholars agree that law is neither insulated from nor
a perfect mirror of the society, but lies somewhere between the two poles.31 It
follows that “legal institutions are responsive to social change; moreover, they
have a definite role… as instruments that set off, monitor, or otherwise regulate

28
   See Ridwanul Hoque, Courts and the Adjudication System in Bangladesh: In Quest of
   Viable Reforms, in ASIAN COURTS IN CONTEXT 447, 458 (Jiunn-Rong Yeh & Wen-Chen
   Chang eds., 2014).
29
   STEVEN VAGO, LAW AND SOCIETY 310 (10th ed. 2012).
30
   Id.
31
   Brian Z. Tamanaha, Battle Between Law and Society in Micronesia, in SOCIAL AND
   POLITICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CONSTITUTIONS 584, 584-85 (Denis J. Galligan & Mila
   Versteeg eds., 2013).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
648 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


the fact or pace of social change.”32
     Nevertheless, it is certainly possible that law will lag behind social
change. Some archaic state laws or customary laws 33 persist during the
process of modernization, and the legislature may not be able to respond in
time. When this occurs, courts may fill the gap between law and society
through their decisions. Namely, the judiciary fulfills the function of
modernization by keeping the law in sync with society, a mission that is
thornier in East Asia since “nations within the civil law tradition still
commonly recognize a [] source of law, called custom.” 34 Despite the
difficulty, this function is extraordinarily crucial in many East Asian countries
where Confucianism has permeated into every corner of the society, and many
laws are reflective of this ancient ideology.35 Generally speaking, Confucianism is
a “system of social and political ethics that Confucius, Mencius, and their
followers advocated to build a moral community… in which people can live a
happy and worthy life.”36 To live a happy life, however, Confucianism stresses
the principles of graded love, hierarchism, and filial piety.37 Hence, it “is often
viewed as running counter to the liberal principle of treating people equally
and impartially.”38
     More fundamentally, the existence of judicial review itself is anti-



32
   Lawrence M. Friedman, Legal Culture and Social Development, 4 L. & SOC’Y REV. 29, 29
   (1969).
33
   Note that this paper does not distinguish custom from customary law for simplicity’s sake.
34
   JOHN H. MERRYMAN & ROGELIO PÉREZ-PERDOMO, THE CIVIL LAW TRADITION: AN
   INTRODUCTION TO THE LEGAL SYSTEMS OF EUROPE AND LATIN AMERICA 24 (3d ed. 2007).
35
   Among Asian countries, the influence of Confucianism over legal system may be most
   evident in South Korea and Taiwan, in which the constitutionalism are dubbed Confucian
   constitutionalism. Tom Ginsburg, Confucian Constitutionalism? The Emergence of
   Constitutional Review in Korea and Taiwan, 27 L. & SOC. INQUIRY 763 (2002).
36
   DOH CHULL SHIN, CONFUCIANISM AND DEMOCRATIZATION IN EAST ASIA 74 (2011).
37
   Id. at 180-82; WEIMING TU ET AL. EDS., THE CONFUCIAN WORLD OBSERVED: A
   CONTEMPORARY DISCUSSION OF CONFUCIAN HUMANISM IN EAST ASIA 55 (1992).
38
   SHIN, supra note 36, at 183.
                               Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 649


Confucian, or broadly speaking, unconventional in East Asian countries.39 As
a corollary, courts in these places frequently encounter the clash between
constitutional mandate that demands equal protection and customary rules that
can be traced back to the immemorial past. On the one hand, many customs are
inconsistent with modern constitutionalism, and social activists require courts
to demonstrate their willingness and capability to modernize the society by
striking down impugned laws that are too archaic and wooded to sustain. On
the other hand, courts need to face the resistance from traditional forces that
ask courts to respect traditional, cultural, and religious variances. In sum,
courts must walk a thin line between law and convention, and the dilemma is
particularly evident in family cases, such as inheritance, parental rights, and
property.40

     1. Civil Code: Marriage and Parental Rights
       To maintain an ordered and harmonious                  society, Confucianism
emphasizes a hierarchical social structure. In practice, this attitude results in
perennial gender discrimination deeply rooted in most if not all East Asian
societies. In Korea, for example, custom was recognized as a source of law
without much opposition after independence since it was “celebrated as the
embodiment of collective national memory.” 41 Furthermore, it is a
constitutional mandate to sustain and enhance cultural heritage and national
culture in Korea.42 The definition of Korean custom, however, has never been
clearly defined and is actually a complex amalgam of diverse sources, such as


39
   See Ginsburg, supra note 35, at 795. For more discussion on the relationship between
   Confucianism and constitutionalism, see BUI NGOC SON, CONFUCIAN CONSTITUTIONALISM IN
   EAST ASIA 11-18 (2016).
40
   See Patricia Ebrey, The Chinese Family and the Spread of Confucian Values, in THE EAST
   ASIAN REGION: CONFUCIAN HERITAGE AND ITS MODERN ADAPTATION 45, 48-49 (Gilbert
   Rozman ed., 1991).
41
   MARIE SEONG-HAK KIM, LAW AND CUSTOM IN KOREA: COMPARATIVE LEGAL HISTORY 270
   (2012).
42
   Art. 9 of CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA (1948).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
650 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


traditional Korean culture, Japanese law, neo-Confucianism, and so forth.
Among them, Confucianism has been hailed as state orthodoxy for more than
five hundred years.43 Some scholars have even suggested that “Confucianism
in Korea was intensified and became more Confucian than Confucius.” 44
Unsurprisingly, therefore, the Civil Code in Korea 45 was permeated with
gender    discrimination      that    have    been     challenged     repeatedly     after
                     46
democratization.
     To begin with, the Korean Civil Code prescribed that people with the
same surname that come from the same geographical location are prohibited to
marry each other. The rationale behind this custom is to prevent incest, since
these people may originate from the same family long time ago.47 This custom
existed in other Asian countries as well, but only Korea kept this law after
democratization. Obviously, such regulation violates human dignity and the
right to pursue happiness enshrined in the Constitution of Korea.48 In 1997,
the Constitutional Court of Korea declared related provisions unconstitutional
in a 7-2 decision — a ruling that led to vociferous protest form Confucian
traditionalists.49
     The household headship (hoju) system is another paradigmatic example in
which the judiciary strived to emancipate Korea from the tether of customary
constraint. Like early Roman law in which “the father was monarch and the



43
   John Kie-Chiang Oh, Adaptations in Korea: Confucianism, Democracy, and Economic
   Development, in CONFUCIAN CULTURE AND DEMOCRACY 85, 89 (John Fuh-Sheng Hsieh ed.,
   2014); Ilhyung Lee, Korean Perception(s) of Pyungdeung (Equality), in LAW AND SOCIETY
   IN KOREA 67, 71 (Hyunah Yang ed., 2013).
44
   Lee, supra note 43, at 91-92.
45
   CIVIL ACT (S. KOREA).
46
   See Tae-Ung Baik, Public Interest Litigation in South Korea, in PUBLIC INTEREST
   LITIGATION IN ASIA 115, 123-24 (Po Jen Yap & Holning Lau eds., 2011).
47
   See Chaihark Hahm, Law, Culture, and the Politics of Confucianism, 16 COLUM. J. ASIAN L.
   253, 288 (2003).
48
   CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA (1987).
49
   See Ginsburg, supra note 35, at 787.
                                Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 651


head of the family,”50 the Confucian thinking underscores that the husband
(i.e., male) is superior to the wife (female), and the son to the daughter in a
family.51 In the past, the head of family should be the eldest son when the
father dies, even though the eldest son has other older sisters, a law that results
from the eldest son’s ritual position to offer decent sacrifices for the
ancestors. 52 This system is built upon the concept of Confucian lineage
revolving around male descent line.53 Meanwhile, it was a legacy that was
arguably imposed by Japanese, another country that is also influenced by
Confucianism to some extent, during the period of colonialization.54 Due to
the position as head of the family, the eldest son controls a disproportionate
amount of social and economic power over other family members. As a result,
the household system undergirds the paternalism and aggravate gender
discrimination in which female members subordinate to male. In 2000, social
groups petitioned the Korean Constitutional Court, trying to abolish the
household system. Again Confucian groups vehemently opposed the proposal
of abolition and defended the system on traditional grounds.55 Eventually, the
Constitutional Court struck down the law in 2005 in spite of the
acknowledgement that the system was indeed deeply rooted in the Korean
history.
     Similar to Korea, Confucianism has influenced Taiwan’s legal culture to a
considerable extent, even though its impact has declined in recent years.

50
   LAWRENCE M. FRIEDMAN, THE LEGAL SYSTEM: A SOCIAL SCIENCE PERSPECTIVE 280 (1975).
51
   See John Fuh-Sheng Hsieh, Introduction: Democracy, Confucian Style?, in CONFUCIAN
   CULTURE AND DEMOCRACY 1, 6 (John Fuh-Sheng Hsieh ed., 2014).
52
   See KIM, supra note 41, at 371.
53
   Hahm Chaihark, Negotiating Confucian Civility Through Constitutional Discourse, in THE
   POLITICS OF AFFECTIVE RELATIONS: EAST ASIA AND BEYOND 277, 301 (Chaihark Hahm &
   Daniel A. Bell eds., 2004).
54
   See Hyunah Yang, Colonialism and Patriarchy: Where the Korean Family-head (hoju)
   System Had Been Located, in LAW AND SOCIETY IN KOREA 45, 46 (Hyunah Yang ed., 2013);
   Jinsu Yune, Tradition and the Constitution in the Context of the Korean Family Law, 5 J.
   KOREAN L. 194, 205 (2005).
55
   See Yang, supra note 54, at 53.
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
652 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


Confucius’s birthday was once a national holiday and his teaching was once a
designated reading in high schools. One Justice of the Constitutional Court in
Taiwan even claimed that Confucianism should be responsible for the low
popularity of the judiciary. Against this background, it should not be surprising
that many provisions in Taiwan’s Civil Code also mirrors Confucian thinking
based on stereotypical gender discrimination. These laws soon became the
targets of women’s groups after democratization.56 Before 1996, for example,
Taiwan’s Civil Code plainly stipulated the superiority of fatherhood57 in the
sense that the father has the final say over the mother whenever there is a
disagreement in exercising parental rights. This structural patriarchy is derived
from Confucian classics in which fathers have great legal authority over
mothers and children.58 In 1994, Taiwan’s Constitutional Court ruled against
the tradition but made a compromise, declaring that related Civil Code
provision shall be void, not immediately, but within two years.59
     Furthermore, male dominance in a household can also been seen from the
husband-wife relationship. At one time, a wife’s property belonged to her
husband’s unless she could prove the property was acquired before marriage.
This clearly violated equal protection, and the Constitutional Court demanded
statutory revision as soon as possible.60




56
   See Wen-Chen Chang, Public Interest Litigation in Taiwan: Strategy for Law and Policy
   Changes in the Course of Democratization, in PUBLIC INTEREST LITIGATION IN ASIA 136,
   142-44 (Po Jen Yap & Holning Lau eds., 2011).
57
   See Chao-Ju Chen, Mothering Under the Shadow of Patriarchy: The Legal Regulation of
   Motherhood and Its Discontents in Taiwan, 1 NAT’L TAIWAN U. L. REV. 47, 80-90 (2006);
   Chao-Ju Chen, The Chorus of Formal Equality: Feminist Custody Law Reform and Fathers’
   Rights Advocacy in Taiwan, 28 CANADIAN J. WOMEN & L. 116, 122-29 (2016).
58
   See Ebrey, supra note 40.
59
   Judicial Yuan, https://cons.judicial.gov.tw/jcc/en-us/jep03/show?expno=365 (last visited
   Sept. 2, 2021).
60
   Judicial Yuan, https://cons.judicial.gov.tw/jcc/en-us/jep03/show?expno=410 (last visited
   Sept. 2, 2021).
                                Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 653


     2. Civil Code: Inheritance
       Since ancestor veneration is one core family ritual in Confucianism, there
are many conventional norms regulating related issues, such as the
qualification of worshippers and the requirement of agnatic adoption. Part of
the reasons is because the purpose of adoption in traditional Confucian
thinking is for the continuity of the family, not the best interest of the children.
After modernization, these customs result in many controversies between
modern law and custom. Scholars have suggested that it is a “determining
characteristic of Korean family tradition” that non-agnate child cannot take the
adoptive father’s family name.61 Therefore, non-agnatic adoption before the
revision of Civil Code of 1960 was not officially recognized until 1994 when
the Supreme Court switched and recognized the validity of these adoptions.
Another case relates to membership of ancestor worship. In the past, female
family members were not seen as members of the clan (chongchung or
jongjung) as a result of customary law in Korea.62 In 2005, The Supreme
Court of Korea unmistakably ruled that the legal order has changed and the
foundation of male-only membership has been undermined to a considerable
extent in modern society.63 Hence, the customary law at issue lost binding
force since the traditional family system dominated by Confucianism was
repugnant to equal protection that are protected in the Constitution. Finally, the
Supreme Court declared another customary law that involves both marriage
and ancestor worship invalid. In Confucianism, the status of the son born out
of wedlock is legally inferior to the son and the grandson born in a legitimate
marriage. This attitude is reflected in the precedents of the Supreme Court in
the past. In 2008, however, the Supreme Court overruled its precedents partly

61
   Marie Seong-Hak Kim, In the Name of Custom, Culture, and the Constitution: Korean
   Customary Law in Flux Symposium, 48 TEXAS INT’L L.J. 357, 370 (2013).
62
   See Kim, supra note 61, at 367-68.
63
   See Jinsu Yune, Judicial Activism and the Constitutional Reasoning of the Korean Supreme
   Court in the Field of Civil Law, in THE FUNCTIONAL TRANSFORMATION OF COURTS: TAIWAN
   AND KOREA IN COMPARISON 123, 128-29 (Jiunn-Rong Yeh ed., 2015).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
654 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


on the ground of equal protection.64
       Similar discriminatory provisions existed in other East Asian countries as
well. In Taiwan, the Veterans Affairs Commission once proclaimed that only
male descendants can inherit the state farmland distributed to veterans by the
government. The rationale behind this regulation is because females are
supposed to marry and can therefore rely on their husbands for the livelihood.
Both assumptions are clearly grounded on paternalism. The Constitutional
Court declared the regulation unconstitutional and, perhaps not coincidently,
asked the authority to revise it within six months.65

     3. Administrative Law
       In addition to decisions with respect to civil code, administrative law
cases also demonstrate how the judiciary helps modernize a country. In fact,
“one of the things that distinguishes traditional East Asian law from modern
law is precisely the absence of administrative law.”66 Similar to the revision of
civil codes, some East Asian countries introduced administrative laws due to
the desire to abolish unequal treaties or extraterritorial jurisdictions. For
instance, the Westernization of administrative law in East Asia firstly took
place in Japan through the Meiji Restoration in 1868.67 Also, the Republic of
China enacted Administrative Litigation Act in 1932 precisely because of the
same reason.68
       After exponential economic development for two decades or so, many
Asian countries, including but not limited to Japan, Korea, Taiwan, and
Singapore, have transformed themselves from developmental countries to

64
   Yune, supra note 63, at 130.
65
   Judicial Yuan, https://cons.judicial.gov.tw/jcc/en-us/jep03/show?expno=457 (last visited
   Sept. 2, 2021).
66
   John K.M. Ohnesorge, Administrative Law in East Asia: A Comparative-Historical
   Analysis, in COMPARATIVE ADMINISTRATIVE LAW 78, 79 (Susan Rose-Ackerman & Peter L.
   Lindseth eds., 2010).
67
   Id. at 82.
68
   See WANG, supra note 8, at 143-44.
                                Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 655


regulatory states that stress not only efficiency but also transparency and even
public participation.69 During the process of transition, many administrative
laws, such as Administrative Procedure Act or Information Disclosure Act, are
enacted or renovated to rein in the executive. Moreover, the image of an
obedient judiciary vis-à-vis a powerful bureaucracy gradually dissipates as a
result of the judicialization of governance, which should be attributed to a
number of economic, political, and international factors.70 To specify, courts
help to transform the old “administrative informalism and reciprocity-based
political economy” into a transparent and legalistic one. 71 Furthermore,
judicial oversight by specialized commercial courts also turn the domestic and
sometimes discriminatory governmental practices into a more international and
impartial regulatory regime. 72 All these demonstrate how the judiciary
modernize a country in the sphere of administrative law.
     In addition, economic miracle is not without cost. Problems such as
corruption and pollution ensue. Economic growth is no longer the only, and
may not even be the most important, goal of state policy. Instead, people are
more aware of other values in addition to economic prosperity, such as
environmental protection and sustainable development. 73 The dispute of

69
   See, e.g., Daein Kim, Korean Administrative Cases in ‘Law and Development’ Context, in
   LITIGATION IN KOREA 199, 205-15 (Kuk Cho ed., 2010); Jongcheol Kim, Government
   Reform, Judicialization, and the Development of Public Law in the Republic of Korea, in
   ADMINISTRATIVE LAW AND GOVERNANCE IN ASIA: COMPARATIVE PERSPECTIVES 101, 109-12
   (Tom Ginsburg & Albert H.Y. Chen eds., 2009); Jiunn-Rong Yeh, Democracy-Driven
   Transformation to Regulatory State: The Case of Taiwan, in ADMINISTRATIVE LAW AND
   GOVERNANCE IN ASIA: COMPARATIVE PERSPECTIVES 127, 128 (Tom Ginsburg & Albert H.Y.
   Chen eds., 2009).
70
   See Tom Ginsburg, The Judicialization of Administrative Governance: Causes,
   Consequences, and Limits, in ADMINISTRATIVE LAW AND GOVERNANCE IN ASIA:
   COMPARATIVE PERSPECTIVES 1, 5-11 (Tom Ginsburg & Albert H.Y. Chen eds., 2009).
71
   Id. at 5-6.
72
   Id. at 9-10.
73
   Ironically, these issues may be better solved by invoking customary law. Peter Ørebech &
   Fred Bosselman, The Linkage Between Sustainable Development and Customary Law, in
   THE ROLE OF CUSTOMARY LAW IN SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 12, 20-23 (Peter Ørebech et
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
656 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


environmental protection in Taiwan is a good example of how the judiciary
rejects some government-approved construction projects that are allegedly
beneficial to local economic development at the expense of environmental
protection. In the past, the environment in Taiwan had been sacrificed for a
number of goals, such as political needs and trade surplus,74 and scholars have
advocated that courts should heighten the scrutiny of judicial review due to
political malfunction and minority bias during the process of environmental
impact assessment.75 Administrative courts in Taiwan did respond to this call
and ruled against the executive in a series of cases involving environmental
protection. Contributing to the transformation from a developmental state to a
fledging regulatory state, these rulings function as a driver of modernization.

     4. Criminal Code: Adultery
       Reflecting Confucian values, adultery was punishable in some Asian
countries, such as Indonesia, South Korea, and Taiwan, since the family
“constitutes the most fundamental and pervasive unit of social life” and
“virtues directing family life are considered the foundation of all other virtues,
including loyalty to the ruler.”76 In a word, its importance can hardly be
overemphasized. To maintain the integrity of family, countries influenced by
Confucianism usually enacted penal code to deter adultery, which was
considered as a breakdown and betrayal of family virtues. The constitutionality
of such regulations usually face harsh critique because of two reasons. The
first is about its efficacy in deterring adultery; the second about gender
equality. Although these laws are ostensibly gender-neutral, most men, but not


   al. eds., 2005).
74
   See Jiunn-Rong Yeh, Institutional Capacity-Building toward Sustainable Development:
   Taiwan’s Environmental Protection in the Climate of Economic Development and Political
   Liberalization, 6 DUKE J. COMP. & INT’L L. 229, 250-54 (1997).
75
   See Chung-Lin Chen, Judicial Review of Environmental Impact Assessment: From the
   Perspective of Comparative Institutional Analysis, 14 ACADEMIA SINICA L.J. 107, 142-56
   (2014).
76
   SHIN, supra note 36, at 181.
                              Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 657


women, that committed adultery would be forgiven in practice. Namely, the
prohibition has disproportionate impact upon people with different genders.
Not surprisingly, these laws soon become the target of social movements.
Some countries de-criminalized adultery through legislation, but in other
countries it is the judiciary that pioneered the statutory change.
      In South Korea, the Criminal Act that punished adultery had been
challenged and upheld by the Constitutional Court in 1990. Although the
political branches intended to repeal related provision, the proposal did not put
into practice.77 More than two decades later, nevertheless, the same court
declared the same provision unconstitutional for infringing on the right to
sexual self-discrimination and secrecy and freedom of privacy in 2015.78

     5. Summary
      These cases clearly demonstrate courts’ contribution during the process of
modernization, particularly when the law lags behind social change. In the
domain of civil codes, patriarchy was deeply rooted in some societies where
the father is superior to the mother, the husband to the wife, and the son to the
daughter. In this regard, courts endeavor to limit the scope of customs or
customary laws and only admit their validity under certain conditions.
Furthermore, statutes mirroring customs should pass the gauntlet of judicial
review. That is, “tradition in and of itself does not bestow constitutionality on
an otherwise unconstitutional law”79 In the field of administrative law, the
judiciary in many countries has precipitated paradigm shift from developmental
states to regulatory states. Sustainable development rather than economic
growth has become the core goal of state policy. It is fair to say that creating a
modern law system is perceived as a judicial mission by modern



77
   See James M. West & Dae-Kyu Yoon, The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Korea:
   Transforming the Jurisprudence of the Vortex?, 40 AM. J. COMP. L. 73, 111-12 (1992).
78
   KCCR, 2009 HUN-BA17 (S. KOREA).
79
   Yune, supra note 54, at 196.
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
658 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


jurisprudence.80 This perception is reflected even in cases ostensibly irrelevant
with modernization.
       State-ordered apology is one good example. In 1988, one year after
democratization, the Korean Constitutional Court encountered a case in which
the issue was whether forced apology is constitutional in defamation cases.
Ostensibly, it is a tug of war between freedom of speech and freedom of
conscience, and the Constitutional Court ruled that related provisions in Civil
Code was unconstitutional and void. From a cultural perspective, however,
scholars have suggested that the conflict is “between preserving the culture…
or changing the practice and transforming into a more democratic and
advanced country,”81 since forced apology has its cultural overtone in Asia.82
Eventually, since “the Constitutional Court was part of the modernization plan
and     attempting    to     establish      legitimacy   through   rule   of    law   and
                      83
constitutionalism,”        it chose to emphasize the rights discourse at the expense
of the cultural meaning of apology.84
       Nonetheless, although constitutional courts in some East Asian countries
have     successfully      resisted   the     pressure   from   conservatives    groups,
discrimination based on custom does not completely disappear after these
decisions. Indeed, courts sometimes will either uphold the custom-based
statutes or even invoke custom to strike down laws. In Taiwan, Interpretation
No. 728 is the most controversial case regarding gender discrimination in
recent years. The issue involved the Statute Governing Ancestor Worship
Guilds, which prescribes that the qualification of successors of a clan is

80
   KIM, supra note 41, at 284.
81
   Jiunn-rong Yeh, Court-ordered Apology: The Function of Courts in the Construction of
   Society, Culture and the Law, in THE FUNCTIONAL TRANSFORMATION OF COURTS 21, 35
   (Jiunn-Rong Yeh ed., 2015).
82
   See Dai-Kwon Choi, Freedom of Conscience and the Court-ordered Apology for
   Defamatory Remarks, 8 CARDOZO J. INT’L & COMP. L. 205, 211 (2000); Chaihark, supra
   note 53, at 287.
83
   Yeh, supra note 81, at 36.
84
   Id.
                                 Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 659


determined by internal clan regulations. The statute itself is gender neutral, but
traditionally most if not all internal clan regulations restrict succession to male
offspring. Since a successor is entitled to dispose of huge amount of property,
whether the statute violated substantive equal protection in essence is not
without doubt. The case is very similar to the Korean one mentioned above.
Both statutes are rooted in Confucianism and are ostensibly gender neutral
regardless of de facto gender discrimination in practice. Perhaps coincidently,
Taiwan’s Constitutional Court, like its Korean counterpart, upheld the
constitutionality of the statute in question on the ground of formal equality.
Similar case took place in Korea as well. In a case concerning the inheritance
of real property, article 1008-3 of the Korean Civil Code,85 which grants
certain amount of property to the presider of family memorial rituals, was
challenged. Ostensibly, the provision itself is gender-neutral; the issue is that
the presider is traditionally the eldest son or grandson, and thus may create de
facto gender discrimination because male successors therefore inherit a larger
share of legacy than females. The Korean Constitutional Court upheld the
provision on the ground of equal protection, arguing that the law at issue was
“rationally related to the goal of preserving the good custom.”86
     Another less typical but more politically salient case involves customary
constitutional law. In 2003, former President Roh tried to move the capital
from Seoul to other place to encourage development in a more geographically
balanced way. Some citizens petitioned the Constitutional Court, arguing that
the relocation violated the Korean Constitution, even though the location of the
Korean capital is not plainly prescribed. The Constitutional Court ruled against
the Roh administration, contending that “customary constitution” required
Seoul to be the capital of Korea.87 Only one justice issued her dissenting

85
   CIVIL ACT OF KOREA.
86
   Kim, supra note 61, at 378.
87
   See Jongcheol Kim & Jonghyun Park, Causes and Conditions for Sustainable
   Judicialization of Politics in Korea, in THE JUDICIALIZATION OF POLITICS IN ASIA 37, 40-42
   (Björn Dressel ed., 2012).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
660 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


opinion, refuting the idea of “customary constitution.”

C. Judicial Engagement
     The third approach with which the judiciary applies to modernize a state
is through judicial reasoning. In an era of globalization, not only human capital
and investment, but also institutions and ideas have travelled across national
borders. With the wide spread of judicial review and constitutional courts,
recent decades have witnessed the rise of transnational constitutionalism and
the rampant growth of judicial engagement.88 It follows that judicial borrowing
has become increasingly frequent among courts and individual judges,
particularly, but by no means exclusively, in the same legal family. Many other
high courts have frequently cited precedents made by foreign or international
courts, either in the majority or in separate opinions.
     Much ink has been spoiled over this issue, striving to elucidate the
reasons that contribute to this “new world order.”89 First, judicial engagement
has been institutionalized to increase the cooperation and exchanges of
information and experiences related to constitutional justice. In Asia, for
instance, the Association of Asian Constitutional Courts and Equivalent
Institutions,90 currently comprised 16 constitutional adjudicative institutions,
has been established in 2008. These associations have further facilitated
judicial dialogue among different jurisdictions. As a corollary, judges have
more opportunities to meet face to face,91 and foreign decisions are more
accessible these days. Both facilitate judicial dialogue more effectively and


88
   See, e.g., VICKI JACKSON, CONSTITUTIONAL ENGAGEMENT IN A TRANSNATIONAL ERA 71-102
   (2010); Cheryl Saunders, Judicial Engagement with Comparative Law, in COMPARATIVE
   CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 571 (Tom Ginsburg & Rosalind Dixon eds., 2011).
89
   See ANNE-MARIE SLAUGHTER, A NEW WORLD ORDER (2005).
90
   AACCEI, http://www.aaccei.org/ccourt?act=index (last visited June 4, 2016). For more
   discussion, see Maartje De Visser, We All Stand Together: The Role of the Association of
   Asian Constitutional Courts and Equivalent Institutions in Promoting Constitutionalism, 3
   ASIAN J.L. SOC’Y 105 (2016).
91
   See SLAUGHTER, supra note 89, at 96-99.
                               Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 661


efficiently. In addition, globalization of constitutional law, both through the
top-down or bottom-up processes,92         “increases the probability that courts in
different contexts will indeed face common issues and a natural response is to
see how other courts have handled similar questions.”93 Thirdly, from the
perspective of cost-benefit analysis, consulting foreign jurisdictions may
reduce decision cost and the possibility of adjudicative error.94 Even if judges
are not required to consult foreign precedents, they may do so out of
diplomatic reasons — judges may cite foreign decisions in pursuit of policy
goals or as a strategy to grapple with thorny issues.95 Finally, the appearance
of foreign precedents may enhance the credibility and cogency of domestic
courts’ decisions.96 This often occurs in young jurisdictions, since courts in
advanced countries are usually regarded as more authoritative even though the
reasoning is not legally binding.
     It is the last reason that involves modernization as a judicial function in
East Asia. In fact, judicial borrowing is all the more remarkable given the
diversity of legal systems in Asia and “distinctive space on the spectrum
between universalism and particularism” 97 of Asian constitutionalism. “As
constitutional developments of this region have been heavily influenced by the
West, frequent references to foreign or international laws are expected — and
indeed taking place — in many jurisdictions,” 98 such as Hong Kong, 99


92
   See David S. Law, Globalization and the Future of Constitutional Rights, 102 NW. U. L.
   REV. 1277, 1299-1307 (2008); Mark Tushnet, The Inevitable Globalization of
   Constitutional Law, 49 VA. J. INT’L L. 985, 988-95 (2009).
93
   GAROUPA & GINSBURG, supra note 3, at 170.
94
   See Eric A. Posner & Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Other States, 59 STAN. L. REV. 131,
   178-79 (2006) (arguing that many courts are following an implicit Condorcetian logic).
95
   See David S. Law, Judicial Comparativism and Judicial Diplomacy, 163 U. PA. L. REV.
   927, 1003-09 (2015).
96
   See Johanna Kalb, The Judicial Role in New Democracies: A Strategic Account of
   Comparative Citation, 38 YALE J. INT’L L. 423, 445-48 (2013).
97
   Cheryl Saunders, Judicial Engagement, in COMPARATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL LAW IN ASIA 80,
   82-83 (Rosalind Dixon & Tom Ginsburg eds., 2014).
98
   WEN-CHEN CHANG ET AL., CONSTITUTIONALISM IN ASIA: CASES AND MATERIALS 431-32
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
662 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


Japan,100 Malaysia,101 South Korea, Taiwan,102 either in the majority or in
separate opinions. Judges in these jurisdictions use foreign precedents and
doctrines, explicitly or implicitly,103 to support their ruling, even if they are
not required to do so. 104 In explaining judicial borrowing in East Asia,
conventional wisdom mentioned in the previous paragraph is equally
persuasive, but not enough. Taking Israel as an example, scholars have
suggested that Israeli judges “prefer[] to look to ‘the West’ as a source of
comparative and international law, and in doing so to affirm the state’s desire
to be included in the liberal-democratic club of nations.”105 In fact, similar
psychological impetus can be found in other Asian countries. This can be
evinced from the judicial choice of references jurisdictions, which usually vary
from one jurisdiction to another, depending on legal tradition, geographical
proximity, language, and judges’ capability. Nevertheless, some apex courts in
developed regions, such as the Federal Constitutional Court of Germany, the



    (2014).
99
    Id. at 441.
100
    See Akiko Ejima, A Gap Between the Apparent and Hidden Attitudes of the Supreme Court
    of Japan Towards Foreign Precedents, in THE USE OF FOREIGN PRECEDENTS BY
    CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES 273, 283-90 (Tania Groppi & Marie-Claire Ponthoreau eds.,
    2013).
101
    See Yeow Choy Choong, Courts in Malaysia and Judicial Initiated Reforms, in ASIAN
    COURTS IN CONTEXT 375, 385 (Jiunn-Rong Yeh & Wen-Chen Chang eds., 2014).
102
    See David S. Law & Wen-Chen Chang, The Limits of Global Judicial Dialogue, 86 WASH.
    L. REV. 523 (2011).
103
    On this point, see Tania Groppi & Marie-Claire Ponthoreau, Introduction: The Methodology
    of the Research: How to Access the Reality of Transjudicial Communication?, in THE USE
    OF FOREIGN PRECEDENTS BY CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES 1, 5 (Tania Groppi & Marie-Claire
    Ponthoreau eds., 2013).
104
    Of course there are some exceptions. Article 23 of the Constitution of Timor-Leste
    stipulates that “Fundamental rights… shall be interpreted in accordance with the Universal
    Declaration of Human Rights.”
105
    RAN HIRSCHL, COMPARATIVE MATTERS: THE RENAISSANCE OF COMPARATIVE
    CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 23 (2014); see also Frederick Schauer, The Politics and Incentives of
    Legal Transplantation, in GOVERNANCE IN A GLOBALIZING WORLD 253, 258-61 (Joseph S.
    Nye & John D. Donahue eds., 2000).
                               Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 663


Supreme Court of the United States, and the European Court of Human Rights,
are widely cited in many Asian countries despite the variances of legal
tradition and other relevant factors mentioned above.106 And the reason, this
paper suggests, lies in part in the desire of the judiciary to modernize the state,
consciously or unconsciously. This is particularly true given that many East
Asian countries have just transformed from authoritarian regimes. Against this
background, referring foreign or international law in judicial decisions may stir
or accelerate social and political change, since they provide a minimum
benchmark standard.107 Namely, the judiciary may bring domestic governments
in line with Western standards by strengthening its reasoning through foreign
or international laws. Indeed, this strategy may work given that law in
developing countries are usually influenced by, if not modeled on, similar laws
in developed countries during the process of legislation. Against this
background, courts also “assume the function of enabling international laws
into the domestic context, thus diminishing the legitimacy problems of external
norms”108 through judicial borrowing. From this perspective, modernization
as a judicial function contributes to the emergence of transnational
constitutionalism, in which the boundary between national constitutions and
legal families has been crossed.109

D. Objections of Modernization as a Judicial Function
      The thesis of this paper, which advances that modernization is a judicial
function in East Asia, faces two potential counterarguments that need to tackle
with: the first predicates on empirical ground, the second normative. To begin

106
    HIRSCHL, supra note 105, at 27.
107
    See Wen-Chen Chang, An Isolated Nation with Global-minded Citizens: Bottom-up
    Transantional Constitutionalism in Taiwan, 4 NAT’L TAIWAN U. L. REV. 203, 218 (2009);
    Hurst Hannum, The Status of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in National and
    International Law, 25 GA. J. INT’L & COMP. L. 287, 292 (1996).
108
    Jiunn-Rong Yeh & Wen-Chen Chang, The Emergence of Transnational Constitutionalism:
    Its Features, Challenges and Solutions, 27 PENN ST. INT’L L. REV. 89, 107 (2008).
109
    Yeh & Chang, supra note 108, at 90-98.
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
664 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


with, some may suggest that modernization is a mission of judicial review even
in advanced jurisdictions, such as the United States110 — that is, there is
nothing special of courts in East Asia. Focusing on judicial review in America,
Professor Strauss proposes a modernization approach that urges judges to
anticipate public sentiment and reconcile the tension between judicial review
and democracy.111 To be sure, modernization in this sense may be common to
courts around the world, since public support is simultaneously a precious
asset and a consequential constraint of the judicial branch112 that has neither
force nor will. Nonetheless, modernization, according to Strauss’s argument, is
merely an interpretive method of judicial review in the U.S., while
modernization as judicial function is a more comprehensive state-building
project in East Asia, since most countries in this region still stay at, if not just
go through, the developing stage. The pivotal difference is reflected not only
by the institutional renovation of the judiciary, but also by judicial borrowing
embedded in the reasoning. This is in a stark contrast with the so-called
American exceptionalism in the sphere of constitutional interpretation, 113
which will be further elaborated later. From this perspective, modernization as
a judicial function in East Asia involves more than the modernizing mission of
judicial review.
      Based on normative ground, some may argue that modernization should
not be a factor judges take into account because it is, strictly speaking,
irrelevant to the case in question. Modernity is a multi-faceted concept and,
opponents argue, acknowledging this function will implicitly recognize the


110
    See David A. Strauss, The Modernizing Mission of Judicial Review, 76 U. CHICAGO L. REV.
    859 (2009).
111
    Id. at 862-64.
112
    See TOM S. CLARK, THE LIMITS OF JUDICIAL INDEPENDENCE 3-4 (2010); BARRY FRIEDMAN,
    THE WILL OF THE PEOPLE: HOW PUBLIC OPINION HAS INFLUENCED THE SUPREME COURT AND
    SHAPED THE MEANING OF THE CONSTITUTION 14-18 (2009).
113
    See Lorraine E. Weinrib, The Postwar Paradigm and American Exceptionalism, in THE
    MIGRATION OF CONSTITUTIONAL IDEAS 84 (Sujit Choudhry ed., 2006).
                               Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 665


policy-making power of the judiciary. At the extreme, it might suggest that the
judiciary has the power to decide the future of a country, which is undoubtedly
undemocratic. It follows that whether judges can legitimately do so remains an
open question, as politicians are allegedly more representative and
accountable. These critiques, albeit reasonable, overstate judicial discretion
and underestimate judicial accountability. Judges do not predict and choose
future trends entirely at their will; more often than not, their decisions mirror
the trends that have already been endorsed by the society. Moreover,
modernization does not necessarily mean that legal transplantation takes place
without reconciliation with local custom. Contrarily, an institutional and
jurisprudential hybridity that mixes foreign and domestic elements is usually
the case. Indeed, the normative objection sheds new light on several old topics
that is worth further elaborating.

III. Some Normative Implications
      From the aforementioned discussion, modernization is evidently part of
judicial functions in many East Asian jurisdictions. Indeed, this should not be
surprising given the emergence of East Asian constitutionalism in which
constitution-making is seen more as a tool for facilitating modernization than
as a straitjacket upon government power.114 If constitutions are designed to
modernize developing states, little wonder that modernization will become one
function of the courts that are responsible for interpreting constitutions. This is
particularly true when Ease Asian constitutions are the products of negotiations
among political elites rather than social contracts in Lockean sense. 115

114
    See Jiunn-Rong Yeh & Wen-Chen Chang, The Emergence of East Asian Constitutionalism:
    Features in Comparison, 59 AM. J. COMP. L. 805, 816-20 (2011).
115
    See Michael C. Davis, Human Rights, Political Values, and Development in East Asia, in
    HUMAN RIGHTS: NEW PERSPECTIVES, NEW REALITIES 139, 144-47 (Adamantia Pollis & Peter
    Schwab eds., 2000); see also Tom Ginsburg, Constitutions as Contract, Constitutions as
    Charters, in SOCIAL AND POLITICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CONSTITUTIONS 182, 185 (Denis J.
    Galligan & Mila Versteeg eds., 2013).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
666 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


Through this lens, it is more understandable why this function is most evident
in the realm of constitutional law. Understanding modernization as a judicial
function may provide us with some new thoughts regarding old debates, such
as legal transplantation, living constitutionalism, and judicial capability to
bring about social change.

A. From Transplantation to Indigenization
      Whether, or to what extent, legal transplantation can be successful has
been an intriguing question for generations. Based on the experience of
European countries, some scholars suggest that law is “at least sometimes,
insulated from social and economic change.”116 Therefore, legal migration is
not only possible, but the major way of legal development. 117 On the
pessimistic end of the continuum, critics have long suggested that legal transfer
does not occur within a political vacuum, and it will inevitably affect and
interact with both state institutions and non-state actors. 118 In fact, legal
transplantation usually fails because “foreign rules are irritants not only in
relation to domestic legal discourse itself, but also in relation to the social
discourse to which law is, under certain circumstances, closely coupled.”119
Although some legal institutions are more mechanical and thus more
transferrable than others, “a [law] is necessarily an incorporative cultural
form.”120 These arguments, albeit illuminating, are predicated predominantly


116
    William Ewald, Comparative Jurisprudence (II): The Logic of Legal Transplants, 43 AM. J.
    COMP. L. 489, 503 (1995).
117
    See Alan Watson, Aspects of Reception of Law, 44 AM. J. COMP. L. 335, 335 (1996); ALAN
    WATSON, THE EVOLUTION OF WESTERN PRIVATE LAW (2001).
118
    See John Gillespie & Pip Nicholson, Taking the Interpretation of Legal Transfers Seriously,
    in LAW AND DEVELOPMENT AND THE GLOBAL DISCOURSES OF LEGAL TRANSFERS 1, 9 (John
    Gillespie & Pip Nicholson eds., 2012).
119
    Gunther Teubner, Legal Irritants: Good Faith in British Law or How Unifying Law Ends
    Up in New Divergences, 61 MOD. L. REV. 11, 31-32 (1998); O. Kahn-Freund, On Uses and
    Misuses of Comparative Law, 37 MOD. L. REV. 1 (1974).
120
    Pierre Legrand, The Impossibility of ‘Legal Transplant’, 4 MAASTRICHT J. EUR. & COMP. L.
    111, 116 (1997).
                              Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 667


on the experience of continental Europe and British experience.
      In East Asia, the clash between state law and custom is more intense than
it is in Western societies where “capitalism, liberalism, and their legal systems
collectively developed in sync with their own cultures and societies”121 To fill
the chasm resulted from legal pluralism, domestic courts function as a go-
between through their decisions during the process of modernization, since
they may be more familiar and thus trustworthy to local people, compared with
foreign legal regimes. Nonetheless, it does not imply that domestic courts
blindly import or transplant Western legal concepts on their soils without any
reservation.   Contrarily,    modernization     involves    more    than    wholesale
Westernization. Agents of modernization, including both politicians and
judges, need to make modifications to accommodate local divergences. The
resistance of religious groups mentioned above is one telling example.
Furthermore, even though the imported legal materials sometimes remain
ostensibly identical, the interpretation and application will be adjusted to tailor
to local societal developments. The scenario is more complicated given that
modernization often takes place during the authoritarian periods in East Asian
countries. In addition to the conflict between modern and traditional values,
the antagonism between democratic and autocratic ideologies, such as rule of
law in a thick sense and Asian values, further increases the difficulty of
reaching compromise. Therefore, indigenization to a certain extent is
inevitable, and this has taken place in all three domains listed above.
      For instance, although China established intellectual property courts as a
result of globalization, it intentionally chooses not to mimic Western judicial
system in general as a result of China’s political structure and national
conditions.122 Another example may be the mushroom of constitutional courts

121
    See Brian Z. Tamanaha, The Rule of Law and Legal Pluralism in Development, in LEGAL
    PLURALISM AND DEVELOPMENT: SCHOLARS AND PRACTITIONERS IN DIALOGUE 34, 45 (Brian
    Z. Tamanaha et al. eds., 2012).
122
    See Randall Peerenboom, Between Global Norms and Domestic Realities, in LAW AND
    DEVELOPMENT AND THE GLOBAL DISCOURSES OF LEGAL TRANSFERS 181, 191-93 (John
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
668 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


in East Asia. Given the spread of constitutional court around the globe, it
seems to be a mechanic institution that can be transplanted relatively easily.
Nonetheless, many new constitutional courts have some structural adjustments
to reflect domestic situations. To illustrate, the standing rules vary from one
jurisdiction to another, and some courts are more accessible and more
responsive to the public. Also, they have been vested with divergent ancillary
powers, depending on local needs. The Constitutional Court of Thailand, for
instance, possessed the power to oversee corruption before 2006 “because of
the overarching concern with corruption.”123
      In addition to institutional localization, judicial ruling has also faithfully
mirrored the skirmishes between modernity and tradition in many societies.
Decisions concerning gender equality are telling. On the one hand, courts
endeavor to eradicate archaic and overbroad stereotype against the female; on
the other, the judiciary occasionally succumb to the pressure of traditional
interest groups. One intriguing contention is that traditional practices
concerning the dead are more resilient than those regarding the living. Whether
the line-drawing is precise is beyond the scope of this paper, but the
inheritance of collective property does seem to be the last bastion of gender
discrimination in the disguise of freedom of contract.
      Finally, in terms of the indigenization of judicial reasoning, the doctrine
of proportionality may be the best example in which methodological
convergence and divergent application take place concomitantly. Originally a
German legal concept, the doctrine has been exported to countless jurisdictions
as the most common criteria to evaluate state actions.124 Despite its nearly
universal appearance, however, significant twists have been made according to
domestic legal culture as a result of its flexibility and malleability. Since

    Gillespie & Pip Nicholson eds., 2012).
123
    Tom Ginsburg, Constitutional Courts in East Asia, in COMPARATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
    IN ASIA 47, 61 (Rosalind Dixon & Tom Ginsburg eds., 2014).
124
    See MOSHE COHEN-ELIYA & IDDO PORAT, PROPORTIONALITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
    CULTURE 10-14 (2013).
                               Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 669


proportionality analysis is essentially a balancing test that takes into account a
raft of factors, it is natural that courts embedded in disparate social and
political contexts will weight these factors differently. In Taiwan, for example,
the Constitutional Court has explicitly based its ruling on the doctrine of
proportionality in many decisions. Nevertheless, its understanding towards this
doctrine is slightly different from the original.
      These examples demonstrate that the judiciary does not blindly
incorporate all foreign materials into domestic legal regimes when
modernizing a developing state. Instead, courts have the agenda-setting power
and determine which aspect they are willing to modernize (within the
boundaries of public support). Adaption itself does not mean the failure or
rejection of legal transplantation; rather, it evinces that courts have the
capability to strike a balance between modernity and tradition. This judicial
function may prevent the dead from governing the living and spur more cause
lawyering.

B. Living Constitutionalism
      One recurring debate in American constitutional jurisprudence is whether,
and to what extent, the dead should govern the living? In the United States, the
Supreme Court often justifies their decisions in hard cases by maintaining that
certain practice is “deeply rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition.”125 It
implies that framers’ intent matters to a considerable extent since it mirrored
the history and tradition at the founding era. Hence, advocates of originalism
insist that judges should be bound by framers’ intent because it is a lesser evil,
relatively speaking.126 On the other hand, proponents of living constitutionalism
maintain that constitutional meaning should evolve over time, just like what
common law does.127 To them, originalism is incoherent in theory and impractical

125
    See, e.g., Washington v. Glucksberg, 521 U.S. 702 (1997), Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S.
    558 (2003), McDonald v. City of Chicago, 561 U.S. 742 (2010).
126
    See Antonin Scalia, Originalism: The Lesser Evil, 57 U. CIN. L. REV. 849 (1989).
127
    See DAVID A. STRAUSS, THE LIVING CONSTITUTION 33-46 (2010).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
670 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


in reality, since many great decisions are iconic precisely because they dare to
jettison unmistakable framers’ intent. Although there are many intermediate
theories,128 the two stances basically represent two major camps of this issue.
      Despite the contentious debate in the U.S., nevertheless, many scholars
have pointed out that “originalism is primarily an American obsession”129 in
the sense that “recourse to originalism is virtually nonexistent.”130 This is not
to say that judges never invoke original intent in other countries, 131 but
“[o]riginalism, an extremely controversial question in the United States, is
usually simply not the focus, or even a topic, of debate elsewhere.”132 In a
word, it is “so little celebrated outside the United States” to the extent that it is
almost globally rejected.133
      Many reasons may elucidate why originalism is not particularly appealing
outside the United States. In addition to conventional explanations, this paper
suggests that modernization as a judicial function contributes to the
unpopularity of originalism in East Asia. Instead, the thesis of this paper,
which suggests that modernization is one vital function of the judiciary, is in
harmony with living constitutionalism because it stresses that constitutional
interpretation should reflect changing values.134 To be more specific, constitutions
are usually vague and succinct, relying on courts to fill in gaps and silences.
Since courts shoulder the responsibility to keep the law in sync with


128
    See, e.g., JaCK M. BALKIN, LIVING ORIGINALISM 3 (2011).
129
    Ozan O. Varol, The Origins and Limits of Originalism: A Comparative Study, 44 VAND. J.
    TRANSNAT'L L. 1239, 1242 (2011).
130
    Michel Rosenfeld, Constitutional Adjudication in Europe and the United States: Paradoxes
    and Contrasts, 2 INT’L J. CONST. L. 633, 656 (2004).
131
    See Yvonne Tew, Originalism at Home and Abroad, 52 COLUM. J. TRANSNAT’L L. 780
    (2014).
132
    Claire L’Heureux-Dubé, The Importance of Dialogue: Globalization and the International
    Impact of the Rehnquist Court, 34 TULSA L. REV.15, 33 (1998).
133
    See Jamal Greene, On the Origins of Originalism, 88 TEX. L. REV. 1, 3 (2009); Jill Lepore,
    The Commandments: The Constitution and Its Worshippers, THE NEW YORKER (Jan. 9,
    2011), http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2011/01/17/the-commandments.
134
    See BALKIN, supra note 128, at 334-35.
                              Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 671


modernity, the meaning of constitutions will inevitably evolve over time when
the judiciary imbues the constitutional provisions with modern values. As a
corollary, original intent that is no longer suitable to contemporary world will
not be respected. The changing understanding of equal protection may be
illuminating: many conventions, such as primogeniture, were not branded as
gender discrimination under the influence of patriarchy in the past, but this
situation has changed considerably.
      From the angle of constitutional endurance, moreover, it is more
reasonable to disregard original intent in East Asia, given that the average
lifespan of a constitution in this region 135 is longer than that of all
countries.136 Namely, it is more likely that the political, social, and economic
environments have drastically changed, and the chasm between the framers’
world and modern society is larger. The Constitution of Republic of China
(Taiwan), one of the oldest constitutions in East Asia, may be the extreme
example in this regard. It was enacted in mainland China for a geographically
huge country with 40 million people at the very beginning, but its jurisdiction
was quickly limited to a tiny island, i.e., Taiwan, after the Chinese Civil War.
Given the cataclysm, it is understandable why the Constitutional Court in
Taiwan seldom invokes originalism.
      This is not to say that the judiciary will always keep up with times. In
fact, political scientists have suggested that courts may act as conservators or
enclaves of past elitist values and cultures,137 particularly when judges are
appointed by former ruling parties. In this circumstance, it is possible that
courts may hamper the progress of social developments. Nonetheless, the
judiciary cannot resist the pressure of mainstream society for a long period of
time. If the society has sent out a clear message for social change, the judiciary
will follow the current eventually. This relates to another heatedly debated


135
    See WEN-CHEN CHANG ET AL., supra note 98, at 221.
136
    See ZACHERY ELKINS ET AL., THE ENDURANCE OF NATIONAL CONSTITUTIONS 2 (2009).
137
    HIRSCHL, supra note 6, at 43-44.
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
672 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


issue: whether the judiciary can bring about social change? Whether there is
any difference between the judiciary in developed countries and in developing
ones in this regard?

C. Not a Hollow Hope?
      Whether the judiciary can bring about social change is an contentious
issue that puzzles scholars of law and society. Proponents of constrained court
model argue that courts are unable to produce social change due to the nature
of constitutional rights, the limits of judicial independence, and the lack of
resources to implement judicial decisions.138 By contrast, critics of such view
believe that judicial decisions can serve as a catalyst if not a club to galvanize
more social reforms.139 More fundamentally, “the principal contribution of
courts is the provision of a background of norms and procedures, against which
negotiations and regulations in both private and governmental settings takes
place.”140 Despite the heated debates in the U.S., scholars have maintained
that “public interest litigation has become a significant driver of social change
in Asia,”141 and “courts often spearheaded [legislative revision] by forcing the
legislature to act.”142 Insomuch as these statements are true, the question then
becomes why courts in these countries seem to be less constrained by the
institutional and political limitations identified above?
      This paper suggests that this situation can be better appreciated through
the prism of judicial functions, particularly the function of modernization. To
be more specific, courts in Asian countries, most of which are developing
states, are more likely to spur social reforms because these social reforms take

138
    See RosENBERG, supra note 15, at 10-21.
139
    See MICHAEL W. MCCANN, RIGHTS AT WORK: PAY EQUITY REFORM AND THE POLITICS OF
    LEGAL MOBILIZATION 48-91, 138-79 (1994).
140
    Id. at 178.
141
    See Po Jen Yap & Holning Lau, Rights at Work: Pay Equity Reform and the Politics of
    Legal Mobilization, in PUBLIC INTEREST LITIGATION IN ASIA 1, 1 (Po Jen Yap & Holning
    Lau eds., 2011).
142
    KIM, supra note 41, at 292.
                                Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 673


place with an eye to modernity. And the need of modernization helps to
overcome some of the major constraints that thwart judicial efforts. To begin
with, conventional wisdom has maintained that courts cannot produce social
change without the support of either the executive or the legislative. This is
also true even in developing countries where the judicial branch usually enjoys
fewer resources than their counterparts in wealthy states. The relative lack of
resources in developing states, however, renders modernization a common goal
for both the political branches and the judiciary. This not only means that
politicians have more incentive to induce compliance,143 but also indicates a
larger tolerance interval for the judiciary. In fact, social reforms involving
modernization is often consistent with the interests of political and economic
elites. The establishment of economic courts and the following financial and
monetary reforms in some Asian countries are actually welcomed by many
political and economic elites, let alone foreign investors. That is, the pressure
from market will push for more social reforms and therefore free the judiciary
from another constraint — the lack of tools to implement its decisions — even
without government support. 144 Certainly, not every social reform is
welcomed by all the people in a heterogeneous society. In the process of
modernization, some social reforms face fierce opposition from conservative
forces, such as some religious groups. Under this circumstance, social reforms
are usually achieved not because of government policies, but because of
judicial mandates at the beginning. The revision of family law in many East
Asian countries is a good example. Politicians are willing to implement
judicial decisions that serve as a shield to avoid blame.145 In a word, social
reforms which aim to modernization will not often encounter strong opposition
from the political branches, to say the least.



143
    See ROSENBERG, supra note 15, at 33.
144
    Id.
145
    See WhITTINGTON, supra note 4, at 134-52.
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
674 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


        Scholars have suggested that rights revolution through litigation in Asia
should be attributed to democratization, globalization, and judicial self-
perception.146 In fact, the three factors are distinct facets of modernization in
the Asian context. For starters, given the history of authoritarian rule in many
East or Southeast Asian countries in the early twentieth century, transition from
autocracy to democracy is certainly one facet of modernization. Moreover,
many legal systems in Asian countries were originally transplanted from
Western jurisdictions, and globalization that further facilitates legal imitation
and judicial dialogue demonstrate the ongoing process of modernization.
Aware of this trend, domestic judges will be more willing to consult foreign or
international (case) laws in similar disputes that have already occurred in other
places.
        In sum, public-interest litigation in East Asia may be more fruitful not
because judges are more powerful or authoritative, but because many social
reforms involve modernization, a goal that is shared by both the judicial and
political branches. This consonance helps the judiciary overcome many
structural and institutional constraints that normally hobble the judiciary to
bring about social change.

IV. Conclusion
        In addition to traditional functions, such as dispute resolution, social
control, and regime enforcement, modernization is also an important judicial
function, particularly in East Asia. Through this lens, we may better understand
why originalism is less influential in this region. Moreover, it also suggests
that the judiciary is more likely to bring about social change, as these reforms
usually pursue modernity that is consistent with the interests of politicians.
Both may lend further support to the argument that the judiciary is not a



146
      See Yap & Lau, supra note 141, at 2-3.
                            Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 675


counter-majoritarian institution; instead, it usually stands by mainstream
society in developing countries. This is to say that modernization is completely
not a judicial function in developed states. The difference is of course a matter
of degree, not of kind.
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
676 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


                              References
Amsden, Alice H. 1979. Taiwan’s Economic History: A Case of Etatisme and a
    Challenge to Dependency Theory. Modern China 5:341-379.
Baik, Tae-Ung. 2011. Public Interest Litigation in South Korea. Pp. 115-135 in
    Public Interest Litigation in Asia, edited by Po Jen Yap and Holning Lau.
    New York, NY: Routledge.
Balkin, Jack M. 2011. Living Originalism. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of
    Harvard University Press.
Berat, Lynn. 1992. The Role of Conciliation in the Japanese Legal System. The
    American University Journal of International Law Review 8:125-154.
Cammack, Mark. 2010. The Indonesian Human Rights Court. Pp. 178-206 in
    New Courts in Asia, edited by Andrew Harding and Penelope Nicholson.
    New York, NY: Routledge.
Carter, Connie. 2010. Specialized Intellectual Property Courts in the People’s
    Republic of China: Myth or Reality?. Pp. 101-118 in New Courts in Asia,
    edited by Andrew Harding and Penelope Nicholson. New York, NY:
    Routledge.
Chaihark, Hahm. 2004. Negotiating Confucian Civility Through Constitutional
    Discourse. Pp. 277-308 in The Politics of Affective Relations: East Asia
    and Beyond, edited by Hahm Chaihark and Daniel A. Bell. Lanham, MD:
    Lexington Books.
Chang, Wen-Chen, Li-ann Thio, Kevin YL Tan, and Jiunn-Rong Yeh. 2014.
    Constitutionalism in Asia: Cases and Materials. Oxford: Hart Publishing.
Chang, Wen-Chen. 2009. An Isolated Nation with Global-minded Citizens:
    Bottom-up Transantional Constitutionalism in Taiwan. National Taiwan
    University Law Review 4:203-235.
─. 2011. Public Interest Litigation in Taiwan: Strategy for Law and
    Policy Changes in the Course of Democratization. Pp. 136-160 in Public
    Interest Litigation in Asia, edited by Po Jen Yap and Holning Lau. New
                                Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 677


    York, NY: Routledge.
Chen, Chao-Ju. 2006. Mothering Under the Shadow of Patriarchy: The Legal
    Regulation of Motherhood and Its Discontents in Taiwan. National
    Taiwan University Law Review 1:45-96.
─. 2016. The Chorus of Formal Equality: Feminist Custody Law Reform
    and Fathers’ Rights Advocacy in Taiwan. Canadian Journal of Women
    and the Law 28:116-151.
Chen,   Chung-Lin.      2014.     Judicial   Review    of   Environmental    Impact
    Assessment: From the Perspective of Comparative Institutional Analysis.
    Academia Sinica Law Journal 14:107-168.
Choi, Dai-Kwon. 2000. Freedom of Conscience and the Court-ordered
    Apology for Defamatory Remarks. Cardozo International & Comparative
    Law Review 8:205-224.
Choong, Yeow Choy. 2014. Courts in Malaysia and Judicial Initiated Reforms.
    Pp. 375-406 in Asian Courts in Context, edited by Jiunn-Rong Yeh and
    Wen-Chen Chang. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Clark, Tom S. 2010. The Limits of Judicial Independence. Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press.
Cohen-Eliya, Moshe, and Iddo Porat. 2013. Proportionality and Constitutional
    Culture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Davis, Michael C. 2000. Human Rights, Political Values, and Development in
    East Asia. Pp. 139-162 in Human Rights: New Perspectives, New
    Realities, edited by Adamantia Pollis and Peter Schwab. Boulder, CO:
    Lynne Rienner Publishers.
Ebrey, Patricia. 1991. The Chinese Family and the Spread of Confucian Values.
    Pp. 45-83 in The East Asian Region: Confucian Heritage and its Modern
    Adaptation, edited by Gilbert Rozman. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
    University Press.
Ejima, Akiko. 2013. A Gap Between the Apparent and Hidden Attitudes of the
    Supreme Court of Japan Towards Foreign Precedents. Pp. 273-300 in The
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
678 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


     Use of Foreign Precedents by Constitutional Judges, edited by Tania
     Groppi and Marie-Claire Ponthoreau. Oxford: Hart Publishing.
Elkins, Zachery, Tom Ginsburg, and James Melton. 2009. The Endurance of
     National Constitutions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ewald, William. 1995. Comparative Jurisprudence (II): The Logic of Legal
     Transplants. The American Journal of Comparative Law 43:489-510.
Friedman, Barry. 2009. The Will of the People: How Public Opinion Has
     Influenced the Supreme Court and Shaped the Meaning of the
     Constitution. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
Friedman, Lawrence M. 1969. Legal Culture and Social Development. Law &
     Society Review 4:29-44.
─. 1975. The Legal System: A Social Science Perspective. New York, NY:
     Russell Sage Foundation.
Garoupa, Nuno, and Tom Ginsburg. 2015. Judicial Reputation: A Comparative
     Theory. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Gillespie, John, and Pip Nicholson. 2012. Taking the Interpretation of Legal
     Transfers Seriously. Pp. 1-26 in Law and Development and the Global
     Discourses of Legal Transfers, edited by John Gillespie and Pip
     Nicholson. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Gillespie,   John,   and Randall   Peerenboom.   2009.      Pushing   Back on
     Globalization: An Introduction to Regulation in Aisa. Pp. 1-23 in
     Regulation in Asia: Pushing Back on Globalization, edited by John
     Gillespie and Randall Peerenboom. New York, NY: Routledge.
Ginsburg, Tom. 2002. Confucian Constitutionalism? The Emergence of
     Constitutional Review in Korea and Taiwan. Law & Social Inquiry
     27:763-799.
─. 2003. Judicial Review in New Democracies: Constitutional Courts in
     Asian Cases. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
─. 2005. Beyond Judicial Review: Ancillary Powers of Constitutional
     Courts. Pp. 225-274 in Institutions & Public Law: Comparative
                          Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 679


    Approaches, edited by Tom Ginsburg and Robert A. Kagan. New York,
    NY: Peter Lang Publishing.
─. 2009. The Judicialization of Administrative Governance: Causes,
    Consequences, and Limits. Pp. 1-20 in Administrative Law and
    Governance in Asia: Comparative Perspectives, edited by Tom Ginsburg
    and Albert H.Y. Chen. New York, NY: Routledge.
─. 2010. Studying Japanese Law Because It’s There. The American
    Journal of Comparative Law 58:15-26.
─. 2014. Constitutional Courts in East Asia. Pp. 47-79 in Comparative
    Constitutional Law in Asia, edited by Rosalind Dixon and Tom Ginsburg.
    Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
─. 2013. Constitutions as Contract, Constitutions as Charters. Pp. 182-
    206 in Social and Political Foundations of Constitutions, edited by Denis
    J. Galligan and Mila Versteeg. New York, NY: Cambridge University
    Press.
Greene, Jamal. 2009. On the Origins of Originalism. Texas Law Review 88:1-
    78.
Groppi, Tania, and Marie-Claire Ponthoreau. 2013. Introduction: The
    Methodology of the Research: How to Access the Reality of Transjudicial
    Communication?. Pp. 1-10 in The Use of Foreign Precedents by
    Constitutional Judges, edited by Tania Groppi and Marie-Claire. Oxford:
    Hart Publishing.
Hahm, Chaihark. 2003. Law, Culture, and the Politics of Confucianism.
    Columbia Journal of Asian Law 16:253-296.
Hamilton, Alexander. 1788. The Federalist No. 78, edited by Alexander
    Hamilton, James Madison, and John Jay. New York, NY: J. & A. McLean.
Hannum, Hurst. 1996. The Status of the Universal Declaration of Human
    Rights in National and International Law. Georgia Journal of
    International and Comparative Law 25:287-397.
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
680 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


Harding, Andrew, Peter Leyland, and Tania Groppi. 2009. Constitutional
    Courts: Forms, Functions and Practice in Comparative Perspective. Pp. 1-
    30 in Constitutional Courts: A Comparative Study, edited by Andrew
    Harding and Peter Leyland. London: Wildy, Simmonds & Hill Publishing.
Hirschl, Ran. 2004. Towards Juristocracy: The Origins and Consequences of
    the New Constitutionalism. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
─ . 2014. Comparative Matters: The Renaissance of Comparative
    Constitutional Law. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hoque, Ridwanul. 2014. Courts and the Adjudication System in Bangladesh: In
    Quest of Viable Reforms. Pp. 447-486 in Asian Courts in Context, edited
    by Jiunn-Rong Yeh and Wen-Chen Chang. Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press.
Hsieh, John Fuh-Sheng. 2014. Introduction: Democracy, Confucian Style?. Pp.
    1-20 in Confucian Culture and Democracy, edited by John Fuh-Sheng
    Hsieh. Hackensack, NJ: World Scientific.
Issacharoff, Samuel. 2015. Fragile Democracies: Contested Power in the Era
    of Constitutional Courts. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jackson, Vicki. 2010. Constitutional Engagement in a Transnational Era. New
    York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Kahn-Freund, O. 1974. On Uses and Misuses of Comparative Law. The
    Modern Law Review 37:1-27.
Kalb, Johanna. 2013. The Judicial Role in New Democracies: A Strategic
    Account of Comparative Citation. Yale Journal of International Law
    38:424-465.
Kim, Daein. 2010. Korean Administrative Cases in ‘Law and Development’
    Context. Pp. 199-218 in Litigation in Korea, edited by Kuk Cho.
    Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Kim, Jongcheol, and Jonghyun Park. 2012. Causes and Conditions for
    Sustainable Judicialization of Politics in Korea. Pp. 37-55 in The
    Judicialization of Politics in Asia, edited by Björn Dressel. New York,
                           Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 681


    NY: Routledge.
Kim, Jongcheol. 2009. Government Reform, Judicialization, and the
    Development of Public Law in the Republic of Korea. Pp. 101-126 in
    Administrative Law and Governance in Asia: Comparative Perspectives,
    edited by Tom Ginsburg and Albert H.Y. Chen. New York, NY:
    Routledge.
Kim, Marie Seong-Hak. 2012. Law and Custom in Korea: Comparative Legal
    History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
─. 2013. In the Name of Custom, Culture, and the Constitution: Korean
    Customary Law in Flux Symposium. Texas International Law Journal
    48:357-391.
Lau, Holning. 2013. The Language of Westernization in Legal Commentary.
    The American Journal of Comparative Law 61:507-538.
Law, David S. 2008. Globalization and the Future of Constitutional Rights.
    Northwestern University Law Review 102:1277-1350.
─. 2015. Judicial Comparativism and Judicial Diplomacy. University of
    Pennsylvania Law Review 163:927-1036.
Law, David S., and Wen-Chen Chang. 2011. The Limits of Global Judicial
    Dialogue. Washington Law Review 86:523-577.
Lee, Ilhyung. 2013. Korean Perception(s) of Pyungdeung (Equality). Pp. 67-92
    in Law and Society in Korea, edited by Hyunah Yang. Northampton, MA:
    Edward Elgar.
Legrand, Pierre. 1997. The Impossibility of ‘Legal Transplant’. Maastricht
    Journal of European and Comparative Law 4:111-124.
L’Heureux-Dubé, Claire. 1998. The Importance of Dialogue: Globalization and
    The International Impact of The Rehnquist Court. Tulsa Law Review
    34:15-40.
Lin, Chien-Chih. 2016. Constitutions and courts in Chinese Authoritarian
    Regimes: China and pre-democratic Taiwan in comparison. International
    Journal of Constitutional Law 14:351-377.
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
682 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


Linnan, David K. 2010. ‘Reading the Tea Leaves’ in the Indonesian
    Commercial Court: A Cautionary Tale, but for Whom?. Pp. 56-80 in New
    Courts in Asia, edited by Andrew Harding and Penelope Nicholson. New
    York, NY: Routledge.
McCann, Michael W. 1994. Rights at Work: Pay Equity Reform and the
    Politics of Legal Mobilization. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Merryman, John H., and Rogelio Pérez-Perdomo. 2007. The Civil Law
    Tradition: An Introduction to the Legal Systems of Europe and Latin
    America. 3d ed. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Miyakawa, Koji. 2014. Inside the Supreme Court of Japan ─ From the
    Perspective of a Former Justice, translated by Mark A. Levin and Megumi
    Honami Lachapelle. Asian-Pacific Law & Policy Journal 15:196-212.
Moustafa, Tamir, and Tom Ginsburg. 2008. Introduction: The Functions of
    Courts in Authoritarian Politics. Pp. 1-22 in Rule by Law: The Politics of
    Courts in Authoritarian Regimes, edited by Tom Ginsburg and Tamir
    Moustafa. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Oh, John Kie-Chiang. 2014. Adaptations in Korea: Confucianism, Democracy,
    and Economic Development. Pp. 85-110 in Confucian Culture and
    Democracy, edited by John Fuh-Sheng Hsieh. Hackensack, NJ: World
    Scientific.
Ohnesorge, John K. M. 2012. Law and Development Orthodoxies and the
    Northeast Asian Experience. Pp. 9-42 in Law and development in Asia,
    edited by Gerald Paul McAlinn and Caslav Pejovic. New York, NY:
    Routledge.
─. 2010. Administrative Law in East Asia: A Comparative-Historical
    Analysis. Pp. 78-91 in Comparative Administrative Law, edited by Susan
    Rose-Ackerman and Peter L. Lindseth. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Ørebech, Peter, and Fred Bosselman. 2005. The Linkage between Sustainable
    Development and Customary Law. Pp. 12-42 in The Role of Customary
    Law in Sustainable Development, edited by Peter Ørebech, Fred
                             Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 683


     Bosselman, Jes Bjarup, David Callies, Martin Chanock and Hanne
     Petersen. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Peerenboom, Randall. 2012. Between Global Norms and Domestic Realities.
     Pp. 181-201 in Law and Development and the Global Discourses of Legal
     Transfers, edited by John Gillespie and Pip Nicholson. Cambridge:
     Cambridge University Press.
Posner, Eric A., and Cass R. Sunstein. 2006. The Law of Other States. Stanford
     Law Review 59:131-180.
Rosenberg, Gerald N. 2008. The Hollow Hope: Can Courts Bring About Social
     Change?. 2d ed. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Rosenfeld, Michel. 2004. Constitutional Adjudication in Europe and the United
     States: Paradoxes and Contrasts. International Journal of Constitutional
     Law 2:633-668.
Sadurski, Wojciech. 2014. Rights Before Courts: A Study of Constitutional
     Courts in Postcommunist States of Central and Eastern Europe. 2d ed.
     Heidelberg: Springer.
Satayanurug, Pawat, and Nattaporn Nakornin. 2014. Courts in Thailand:
     Progressive Development as the Country’s Pillar of Justice. Pp. 407-446
     in Asian Courts in Context, edited by Jiunn-Rong Yeh and Wen-Chen
     Chang. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Saunders, Cheryl. 2011. Judicial Engagement with Comparative Law. Pp. 571-
     598 in Comparative Constitutional Law, edited by Tom Ginsburg and
     Rosalind Dixon. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
─. 2014. Judicial Engagement. Pp. 80-101 in Comparative Constitutional
     Law in Asia, edited by Rosalind Dixon and Tom Ginsburg. Northampton,
     MA: Edward Elgar.
Scalia, Antonin. 1989. Originalism: The Lesser Evil. University of Cincinnati
     Law Review 57:849-865.
Schauer, Frederick. 2000. The Politics and Incentives of Legal Transplantation.
     Pp. 253-268 in Governance in a Globalizing World, edited by Joseph S.
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
684 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


    Nye and John D. Donahue. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution
    Press.
Shapiro, Martin M. 1981. Courts: A Comparative and Political Analysis.
    Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Shin, Doh Chull. 2011. Confucianism and Democratization in East Asia.
    Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Slaughter, Anne-Marie. 2005. A New World Order. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
    University Press.
Son, Bui Ngoc. 2016. Confucian Constitutionalism in East Asia. New York,
    NY: Routledge.
Strauss, David A. 2009. The Modernizing Mission of Judicial Review. The
    University of Chicago Law Review 76:859-908.
─. 2010. The Living Constitution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tamanaha, Brian Z. 2012. The Rule of Law and Legal Pluralism in
    Development. Pp. 34-49 in Legal Pluralism and Development: Scholars
    and Practitioners in Dialogue, edited by Brian Z. Tamanaha, Caroline
    Sage and Michael Woolcock. New York, NY: Cambridge University
    Press.
─. 2013. Battle Between Law and Society in Micronesia. Pp. 584-610 in
    Social and Political Foundations of Constitutions, edited by Denis J.
    Galligan and Mila Versteeg. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Tan, Kevin Y. 2014. As Efficient as the Best Business: Singapore’s Judicial
    System. Pp. 228-266 in Asian Courts in Context, edited by Jiunn-Rong
    Yeh and Wen-Chen Chang. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tate, C. Neal, and Torbjörn Vallinder. 1995. The Global Expansion of Judicial
    Power. New York, NY: New York University Press.
Teitel, Ruti. 2009. Transitional Jurisprudence: The Role of Law in Political
    Transformation. Yale Law Journal 106:2009-2080.
Teubner, Gunther. 1998. Legal Irritants: Good Faith in British Law or How
    Unifying Law Ends Up in New Divergences. The Modern Law Review
                            Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 685


    61:11-32.
Tew, Yvonne. 2014. Originalism at Home and Abroad. Columbia Journal of
    Transnational Law 52:780-895.
Trubek, David M. 2012. Introduction: Law and Development in the Twenty-
    first Century. Pp. 1-6 in Law and Development in Asia, edited by Gerald
    Paul McAlinn and Caslav Pejovic. New York, NY: Routledge.
Tu, Weiming, Milan Hejtmanek, and Alan Wachman. 1992. The Confucian
    World Observed: A Contemporary Discussion of Confucian Humanism in
    East Asia. Honolulu, Hawaii: University of Hawii Press.
Tushnet, Mark. 2009. The Inevitable Globalization of Constitutional Law.
    Virginia Journal of International Law 49:985-1006.
Vago, Steven. 2012. Law and Society. 10th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
    Prentice Hall.
Varol, Ozan O. 2011. The Origins and Limits of Originalism: A Comparative
    Study. Vanderbilt Journal of Transnational Law 44:1239-1297.
Visser, Maartje De. 2016. We All Stand Together: The Role of the Association
    of Asian Constitutional Courts and Equivalent Institutions in Promoting
    Constitutionalism. Asian Journal of Law and Society 3:105-134.
Wang, Tay-Shen. 2015. The Process of Legal Modernization in Taiwan: From
    “the Extension of Mainland ” to “Independent Reception”. Taipei: Institute
    of Taiwan History, Academica Sinica.
Watson, Alan. 1996. Aspects of Reception of Law. The American Journal of
    Comparative Law 44:335-351.
─. 2001. The Evolution of Western Private Law. Baltimore, MD: Johns
    Hopkins University Press.
Weinrib,   Lorraine   E.   2006.   The   Postwar    Paradigm    and   American
    Exceptionalism. Pp. 84-112 in The Migration of Constitutional Ideas,
    edited by Sujit Choudhry. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
West, James M., and Dae-Kyu Yoon. 1992. The Constitutional Court of the
    Republic of Korea: Transforming the Jurisprudence of the Vortex?. The
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
686 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


    American Journal of Comparative Law 40:73-119.
Whittington, Keith E. 2007. Political Foundations of Judicial Supremacy: The
    Presidency, the Supreme Court, and Constitutional Leadership in U.S.
    History. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Yang, Hyunah. 2013. Colonialism and Patriarchy: Where the Korean Family-
    Head (hoju) System Had Been Located. Pp. 45-66 in Law and Society in
    Korea, edited by Hyunah Yang. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Yap, Po Jen, and Holning Lau. 2011. Rights at Work: Pay Equity Reform and
    the Politics of Legal Mobilization. Pp. 1-8 in Public Interest Litigation in
    Asia, edited by Po Jen Yap and Holning Lau. New York, NY: Routledge.
Yeh, Jiunn-rong. 1997. Institutional Capacity-Building Toward Sustainable
    Development: Taiwan’s Environmental Protection in the Climate of
    Economic Development and Political Liberalization. Duke Journal of
    Comparative & International Law 6:229-272.
─. 2009. Democracy-Driven Transformation to Regulatory State: The
    Case of Taiwan. Pp. 127-142 in Administrative Law and Governance in
    Asia: Comparative Perspectives, edited by Tom Ginsburg and Albert H.Y.
    Chen. New York, NY: Routledge.
─ . 2015. Court-ordered Apology: The Function of Courts in the
    Construction of Society, Culture and the Law. Pp. 21-38 in The
    Functional Transformation of Courts: Taiwan and Korea in Comparison,
    edited by Jiunn-Rong Yeh. Taipei: National Taiwan University Press.
─. 2016. The Constitution of Taiwan: A Contextual Analysis. Oxford:
    Hart Publishing.
Yeh, Jiunn-Rong, and Wen-Chen Chang. 2014. Introduction: Asian Courts in
    Context: Tradition, Transition and Globalization. Pp. 1-74 in Asian Courts
    in Context, edited by Jiunn-Rong Yeh and Wen-Chen Chang. Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press.
                           Modernization as a Judicial Function in East Asia 687


─. 2008. The Emergence of Transnational Constitutionalism: Its Features,
    Challenges and Solutions. Penn State International Law Review 27:89-
    124.
─. 2011. The Emergence of East Asian Constitutionalism: Features in
    Comparison. The American Journal of Comparative Law 59:805-839.
Yune, Jinsu. 2005. Tradition and the Constitution in the Context of the Korean
    Family Law. Journal of Korean Law 5:194-212.
─. 2015. Judicial Activism and the Constitutional Reasoning of the
    Korean Supreme Court in the Field of Civil Law. Pp. 123-138 in The
    Functional Transformation of Courts: Taiwan and Korea in Comparison,
    edited by Jiunn-Rong Yeh. Taipei: National Taiwan University Press.
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
688 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY
