            A Visit to Academia Sinica
                                 David Dyzenhaus*



     In 2016 I was deeply honoured to receive an invitation from Academia
Sinica to deliver the ‘Maestro’ lectures. I confess that I did not know much at
all about Taiwan at that time, other than the fact that it is a bastion of human
rights and democracy and a standard example in international law of a state
which, while highly successful in providing for its population, is not
recognized as a state because of the long-standing dispute with China. I also
knew that a landmark in my Toronto neighbourhood, a statue of Dr. Sun Yat-
Sen which stands at the top of a hill in a park close to my home, was somehow
bound up with the vexed history of Taiwan and I had been intrigued since I
moved into the neighbourhood some 26 years before that no matter what time I
ran past the statue there would be a group of elderly Chinese Canadians
engaged in a serious session of Tai Chi around the statue. (See https://
mcfcrandall.blog/tag/dr-sun-yat-sen/.)
     I knew even less about Academia Sinica, only that it was part of the
system of higher education which gives Taiwan the fine academic reputation it
has. What I knew, however, combined with the honour of having received the
invitation, was more than enough to make me accept immediately and I then
began discussing with Dr. Cheng-Yi Huang, who had issued the invitation, the
format and content of my lectures.
     A second confession is that I was a little concerned about what lectures I


*
   Professor of Law and Philosophy, Faculty of Law, University of Toronto.
Online: http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/71516012.pdf;
        http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/51917012.pdf (Chinese version).
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
118 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


could give. I received my first legal education in apartheid South Africa and
became fascinated then with the problem of understanding the operation of the
rule of law under stress. What resource did law itself offer to resist legalized
oppression? This question has occupied the whole of my academic career,
taking me from work on law during the apartheid era, to a study of the debates
among legal theorists in Germany about the Weimar Constitution, to a study of
the resources offered by the common law to respond to the flurry of emergency
legislation in western democratic countries that followed the attacks on the
USA in 2001.
     At the time the invitation came I was working on a range of problems that
arose out of these various projects, though at a very high level of abstraction;
and I had in place a rough draft of a manuscript, which, as it happens, I have
just completed and which will be published by Cambridge in 2022 as THE
LONG ARC OF LEGALITY: HOBBES, KELSEN, HART. My impulse was to talk
about my work in progress. But my concern was that it is hard to find an
audience interested in these topics, especially when discussed at a high level of
abstraction.
     I was, however, immediately comforted by a look at the website of the
legal studies department of Academia Sinica. Not only is it titled ‘Institutum
Iurisprudentiae’, but also Academia Sinica is a research institution much like
All Souls College, Oxford, where I am currently a visiting fellow and, above
all, many of the legal scholars were both interested in legal theory, even in the
figure I was preoccupied with at the time, Hans Kelsen.
     In discussion with Dr. Huang, I decided on three events: a general lecture
at the Institutum Iurisprudentiae on ‘The Constitution of Legal Authority’,
which would set out the main themes of my work in progress; a general lecture
on ‘The Rule of Law Under Stress’ at the National Taiwan University, which
would deal with the legal significance of the Trump presidency; and a paper
‘Thomas Hobbes and the Rule-by-Law Tradition’, to be presented at a
workshop at Institutum Iurisprudentiae together with papers by scholars from
                                                  A Visit to Academia Sinica 119


the Institute on topics in legal and constitutional theory. I was also provided
with a generous schedule of social events as well as visits to important cultural
sites. It was thus with great excitement that in November 2017 I got ready for
my flight to Taipei, which prompts my third and last confession.
    The evening before my flight, which left in the early hours of the next
morning, I was checking my flight details in order to decide on what time to
order a taxi, when I realized that my flight had in fact left some twenty hours
before and that David Chen, Dr. Huang’s assistant, was about to arrive at the
airport in Taipei to take me to my hotel. I frantically emailed my apologies to
both Dr. Huang and David Chen and managed to rebook my flight for 48 hours
later. I arrived at the airport at the right time, only to find that because my
passport expired in just under six months, I could not enter Taipei, so had to
retreat home and send yet more apologetic emails. I finally made it to Taipei
with a new passport a month or so later. I mention this self-inflicted debacle
only because my hosts in Taipei never showed any irritation despite the great
inconvenience I had caused. In fact, they apologized for the inconvenience to
me! Never before or since have I been treated with such generosity.
    From my perusal of the webpages of the faculty at Institutum
Iurisprudentiae I had high expectations of what I would learn on my visit. But
these were more than surpassed both in the formal discussions in the question
and answer periods that followed both the lectures and the presentations at the
workshop, as well as in the more informal discussions at lunches and dinners.
From the informal discussions, I remember most clearly my delight at learning
that Dr. Huang has a profound knowledge of South African administrative law,
which he had compared in his doctoral work to the Taiwanese administrative
regime, and in finding out about Dr. Hung-Ju Chen’s work on civil
disobedience, a topic of considerable interest to anyone who studies the
Taiwanese past or apartheid South Africa.
    My country’s troubled past and the desire to address its wrongs partly
through law gave me, I thought, a sound basis for discussion of profound
    研之得法：中央研究院法律學研究所成立十週年文集
120 THE WAY TO LAW: IIAS’S 10TH ANNIVERSARY


problems of legal theory with my hosts, informed as they were in their juridical
reflections by the problems, past and present, of their own country. When it
comes to the past, I also have a very vivid recollection of my visit with Dr.
Huang to the National Human Rights Museum, previously the location of the
security agencies’ detention center and military courts, with our guide a man
who had been imprisoned there.
    I took from these and other encounters the following lesson. For many
students who become interested in graduate work in legal or constitutional
theory, what intrigues them is something in their own country’s past or present
that reveals the intriguing relationship between legal authority, moral
obligation, and state power. My advice to such students is to think seriously of
following the example which Dr. Chen and I unwittingly set. That is, anchor
your theoretical inquiry in some real life, practical issues that seem ripe for
exploration and let that guide you along the often arduous path to academic
success.
    I remain immensely grateful to Dr. Huang, the then Dean, Dr. Tzu-Yi Lin,
and everyone else who participated in making my visit so rewarding.
