《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯                  林建志主編
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                        41
臺北 中央研究院法律學研究所 法學叢書 (6)
                Approach to Comparativism
民國 110 年 12 月，頁 41-195


   Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional
    Court’s Approach to Comparativism＊

                            Keynote Speech

                   (Delivered on November 14, 2017)


                                                     ＊＊
                                 David S. Law

 ＊  An earlier version of this chapter was previously published in the University of
    Pennsylvania Law Review under the title Judicial Comparativism and Judicial
    Diplomacy, 163 U. PA. L. REV. 927 (2015). The exceptional and conscientious work
    of the editors of the University of Pennsylvania Law Review on that article is
    gratefully acknowledged. Portions of Sections IV.D and IV.E are adapted from an
    article co-authored with Wen-Chen Chang entitled The Limits of Global Judicial
    Dialogue, 86 WASH. L. REV. 523 (2011). That material is incorporated here with the
    blessing of Professor Chang, to whom I remain deeply indebted. Many thanks to
    Miri Joo, Chien-Chih Lin, Sachiyo Miller, HyunTae Roh, Norimitsu Shirai, Ethan
    Brandt, Hyun Jin Chung, and Ho Jun Yang for indispensable research assistance in a
    variety of languages; to the Center for Empirical Research in the Law at Washington
    University in St. Louis for funding the translation of Korean-language materials; and
    to Francesca Bignami, Cora Chan, Tom Clark, Erin Delaney, Martin Flaherty, David
    Fontana, Martin Gelter, Danny Gittings, Oren Gross, Chaihark Hahm, Yasuo
    Hasebe, Johanna Kalb, Ken Kersch, David Kosar, Ron Krotoszynski, Chulwoo Lee,
    Keun-Gwan Lee, Tom Lee, Jeffrey Lubbers, Manoj Mate, Fernanda Nicola,
    Anselmo Reyes, Woo-Young Rhee, Larry Solum, Nick Stephanopoulos, Brian
    Tamanaha, Steve Vladeck, Po Jen Yap, Simon Young, and David Zaring for
    enormously valuable suggestions and feedback. Above all, this work would not have
    been possible without the generous cooperation and unstinting candor of numerous
    judges, law clerks, and court officials in Hong Kong, Japan, Korea, and Taiwan who
    provided crucial first-hand information and, in some cases, reviewed portions of this
    work for factual error. The fact that they are not acknowledged here by name
    reflects expectations of anonymity and must not be mistaken for lack of gratitude.
 ＊＊ E. James Kelly, Jr., Class of 1965 Research Professor of Law, University of Virginia
    School of Law.
   ［責任校對：莊佩芬］               。
    Online: http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/51513012.pdf.
42                                     《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯


     By global standards, the U.S. Supreme Court is unusual in a
number of respects, but one of its most distinctive characteristics is its
reluctance to engage in comparative constitutional analysis. Much has
been said on the normative question of whether and in what ways the
Court ought to make use of foreign constitutional jurisprudence. Rarely,
however, do scholars broach the underlying empirical question of why
some courts make greater use of foreign law than others.
      To identify the causes of comparativism, a behind-the-scenes
investigation was conducted of four leading courts in East Asia: the
Japanese Supreme Court, the Korean Constitutional Court, the
Taiwanese Constitutional Court, and the Hong Kong Court of Final
Appeal. The results of this investigation highlight the crucial role of
institutional and resource constraints in shaping judicial behavior but
also pose an unexpected challenge to traditional conceptions of the role
and function of constitutional courts.
      Evidence from interviews conducted with numerous justices, clerks,
and senior administrators suggests that a combination of mutually
reinforcing factors creates the conditions necessary for comparativism to
thrive. The first factor is institutional capacity. A court that lacks
institutional mechanisms for learning about foreign law, such as the
recruitment of law clerks with foreign legal expertise or the use of
researchers who specialize in foreign law, is unlikely to make more than
sporadic use of foreign law. The second factor is legal education. Even
the most elaborate of institutional mechanisms for facilitating
comparativism is unlikely to be effective unless it is backed by a system
of legal education that produces an adequate supply of lawyers with
both an aptitude and appetite for comparativism.
     Investigation of the reasons for which courts engage in
comparativism also reveals a hidden underlying phenomenon of judicial
diplomacy. Unlike other judicial practices such as textualism or
originalism, comparativism is not merely a means by which judges
perform legal and adjudicative functions; it can also be a form of
diplomatic activity. When constitutional courts demonstrate mastery of
foreign law or host foreign judges, their goals may not consist
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                    43
                Approach to Comparativism

exclusively, or even primarily, of writing stronger opinions or winning
over domestic audiences. They may also be competing with one another
for international influence or pursuing foreign policy objectives, such as
promotion of the rule of law and judicial independence in other
countries. The concept of judicial diplomacy helps to explain why
constitutional courts engage in a number of practices that are only
tenuously related to the act of adjudication. Although the U.S. Supreme
Court rarely practices constitutional comparativism, it is an active
practitioner of judicial diplomacy in other forms.


                                     Contents
    Introduction: The Divide Between American and Global Constitutionalism
    I.    The Challenges of Measuring Comparativism: Methodology and
          Data Collection
    II.   The Japanese Supreme Court
    III. The Korean Constitutional Court
    IV. The Taiwanese Constitutional Court
    V.    The Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal
    VI. Conventional Explanations for Comparativism
    VII. Diplomatic Explanations for Comparativism
    VIII. Institutional Explanations for Comparativism
    Conclusion: Judicial Diplomacy and Jurisprudential Networks




    INTRODUCTION: THE DIVIDE BETWEEN AMERICAN AND
              GLOBAL CONSTITUTIONALISM

       By global standards, American constitutionalism is unusual — or,
                                         1
as some prefer to say, exceptional — in many respects. Much of what


1    See Steven G. Calabresi, “A Shining City on a Hill”: American Exceptionalism and
44                                                《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



makes it so atypical can be traced directly to the U.S. Constitution itself.
The Constitution is very old. It is also very rarely amended. The average
constitution has a 38% chance of being revised in any given year and is
                                        2
replaced every nineteen years. The U.S. Constitution, by contrast, is
                                                             3
the oldest surviving constitution in the world. It has lasted twelve times
longer than the average constitution, and it has not been amended in over
                 4
twenty years.

       Whether one considers these characteristics of longevity and
                                                         5
stability praiseworthy — and some do not — they have as a purely


     the Supreme Court’s Practice of Relying on Foreign Law, 86 B.U. L. REV. 1335,
     1405-11 (2006) (discussing various features of American constitutional law that
     “explicitly reflect the extent to which America is an exceptional nation, different from
     any other,” and describing the Constitution itself as “the focal point of American
     exceptionalism,” “our holiest of holies,” and “our ark of the covenant”); David S.
     Law & Mila Versteeg, The Declining Influence of the United States Constitution, 87
     N.Y.U. L. REV. 762, 854 (2012) (discussing the view that the U.S. Constitution “lies at
     the very heart of an ‘American creed of exceptionalism,’ which combines a belief that
     the United States occupies a unique position in the world with a commitment to the
     qualities that set the United States apart from other countries”).
2    See ZACHARY ELKINS, TOM GINSBURG & JAMES MELTON, THE ENDURANCE OF
     NATIONAL CONSTITUTIONS 101, 129 (2009) (calculating a mean “predicted
     amendment rate” of 0.38 per year and a median lifespan of nineteen years for the
     world’s constitutions).
3    See Law & Versteeg, supra note 1, at 852-53.
4    The most recent amendment, the Twenty-Seventh Amendment, was adopted in 1992
     and stands as an object lesson in the difficulty of amending the U.S. Constitution:
     over two hundred years elapsed between its proposal and its ratification. See David S.
     Law & David McGowan, There Is Nothing Pragmatic About Originalism, 102 NW. U.
     L. REV. COLLOQUY 86, 93 & n.34 (2007) (using the history of the Twenty-Seventh
     Amendment to illustrate the difficulty of adopting even the most popular of
     constitutional amendments).
5    See, e.g., SANFORD LEVINSON, OUR UNDEMOCRATIC CONSTITUTION: WHERE THE
     CONSTITUTION GOES WRONG (AND HOW WE THE PEOPLE CAN CORRECT IT) 9 (2006)
     (arguing that the U.S. Constitution has become “significantly dysfunctional” to the
     point of warranting a constitutional convention); LARRY J. SABATO, A MORE PERFECT
     CONSTITUTION: 23 PROPOSALS TO REVITALIZE OUR CONSTITUTION AND MAKE
     AMERICA A FAIRER COUNTRY 4-5 (2007) (bemoaning the “political ossification” and
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                          45
                Approach to Comparativism

empirical matter rendered the Constitution increasingly out of sync with
the global mainstream. Since World War II, constitutional drafting
around the world has become characterized by the widespread adoption
of a core set of generic constitutional rights that extend beyond the
                                                                                   6
negative civil and political liberties found in the Bill of Rights. The
U.S. Constitution, a relic of the late eighteenth century, has not partaken
of these trends. Instead, it omits a significant number of provisions that
have become highly popular, while including others that have become
                   7
highly atypical.


  “grotesque” inequities that have resulted from failure to engage in more than
  “insufficient tinkering” with the Constitution over the last two centuries); Michael
  Ignatieff, Introduction: American Exceptionalism and Human Rights (dubbing the
  U.S. Bill of Rights “a late eighteenth-century constitution surrounded by twenty-first-
  century ones, a grandfather clock in a shop window full of digital timepieces”), in
  AMERICAN EXCEPTIONALISM AND HUMAN RIGHTS 1, 11 (Michael Ignatieff ed., 2005).
6 See, e.g., Philip Alston, A Framework for the Comparative Analysis of Bills of Rights
  (enumerating a “core set of civil and political rights which is reflected almost without
  fail” in new national constitutions and international human rights instruments alike), in
  PROMOTING HUMAN RIGHTS THROUGH BILLS OF RIGHTS: COMPARATIVE
  PERSPECTIVES 1, 2 (Philip Alston ed., 1999); David S. Law & Mila Versteeg, The
  Evolution and Ideology of Global Constitutionalism, 99 CALIF. L. REV. 1163, 1200-01
  (2011) (identifying the twenty-five most “generic” rights-related constitutional
  provisions in the world, and documenting their rise in popularity from 1946 through
  2006); Christopher McCrudden, A Common Law of Human Rights?: Transnational
  Judicial Conversations on Constitutional Rights, 20 OXFORD J. LEGAL STUD. 499, 501
  (2000) (observing that most post-war constitutions combine distinctive elements with
  a “common core of human rights provisions that are strikingly similar”).
7 See Law & Versteeg, supra note 1, at 804-06 (identifying the most “generic” rights-
  related provisions found in constitutions, and documenting the extent to which the
  U.S. Constitution both omits highly popular provisions and includes highly unpopular
  provisions); see also, e.g., Stephen Gardbaum, The Myth and the Reality of American
  Constitutional Exceptionalism, 107 MICH. L. REV. 391, 395, 399 (2008) (noting that
  the sheer age and “correspondingly anachronistic concerns” of the Constitution, and
  “its comparatively few enumerated rights,” “especially of a substantive rather than a
  procedural nature,” all stand in “marked contrast to [the] paradigmatic post-1945,
  rights-protecting constitutions” prevalent elsewhere in the world); Ignatieff, supra
  note 5, at 10 (noting that the U.S. Constitution is atypical in its omission of
  socioeconomic and welfare rights, its phrasing of rights in negative terms, and its
46                                                 《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



      Other odd features of American constitutionalism are attributable
not to the Constitution, but rather to the Supreme Court. Interpretive and
argumentative approaches popular in the United States barely register in
other countries, and vice versa. For example, originalism has become a
fixture of judicial, academic, and even popular debate in the United
       8
States but, as a former Canadian Supreme Court justice has observed, it
                                                                                 9
is “simply not the focus, or even a topic, of debate elsewhere.”

      As distinctive as the presence of originalism, however, is the
                                   10
absence of comparativism.               It is difficult to identify a national high


   inclusion of rights that “do not feature in other democratic systems,” such as the right
   to bear arms); Cass R. Sunstein, Why Does the American Constitution Lack Social
   and Economic Guarantees? (deeming the U.S. Constitution “distinctive” in its
   omission of social and economic rights), in AMERICAN EXCEPTIONALISM AND HUMAN
   RIGHTS, supra note 5, at 90, 92.
8 See, e.g., Jamal Greene, On the Origins of Originalism, 88 TEX. L. REV. 1, 10-12 (2009)
   (describing “the elevated space originalism occupies within American legal and political
   culture”).
9 Claire L’Heureux-Dubé, The Importance of Dialogue: Globalization and the
   International Impact of the Rehnquist Court, 34 TULSA L.J. 15, 33 (1998) (arguing that
   the U.S. Supreme Court’s “international impact” has diminished due in part to its
   preoccupation with originalism); see also, e.g., Greene, supra note 8, at 3-6 (discussing
   the “global rejection of American-style originalism”); Ozan O. Varol, The Origins and
   Limits of Originalism: A Comparative Study, 44 VAND. J. TRANSNAT’L L. 1239, 1242,
   1262-77 (2011) (noting the “prevailing view” that “originalism is primarily an
   American obsession,” and discussing at length the rare counterexample of the Turkish
   Constitutional Court’s use of originalist reasoning to defend a strict separation of
   church and state). Although it is an overstatement to say that originalism is not
   discussed anywhere else in the world, Justice L’Heureux-Dubé’s assessment is not
   terribly far from the mark. Singapore, Malaysia, and to some extent Australia, are rare
   examples of countries other than the United States where originalist arguments are
   frequently encountered. See PO JEN YAP, CONSTITUTIONAL DIALOGUE IN COMMON
   LAW ASIA (forthcoming 2015) (manuscript at 262-66) (on file with author) (discussing
   the espousal of “hard originalism” in Singapore); Yvonne Tew, Originalism at Home
   and Abroad, 52 COLUM. J. TRANSNAT’L L. 780, 783-84 (2014) (listing Malaysia,
   Turkey, Singapore, Australia, and the United States as countries where some form of
   originalist methodology has taken hold).
10 See, e.g., Ignatieff, supra note 5, at 1, 8-10, 14 (identifying “legal isolationism,” or the
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                           47
                Approach to Comparativism

court that pays less attention to foreign constitutional jurisprudence than
                                 11
the U.S. Supreme Court.               Indeed, the Court’s reluctance to engage


   unwillingness of American judges to consider “foreign human rights precedents,” as a
   form of “American exceptionalism” in the area of human rights, and observing that
   “[i]n the messianic American moral project, America teaches the meaning of liberty to
   the world; it does not learn from others”); Frank I. Michelman, Integrity-Anxiety?
   (“[E]xceptional reluctance by the American judiciary to pay heed to foreign
   constitutional law may seem... both the toughest to explain and the most embarrassing
   of all the types of U.S. exceptionalism in the field of human rights....”), in AMERICAN
   EXCEPTIONALISM AND HUMAN RIGHTS, supra note 5, at 241, 244.
11 See, e.g., MICHAL BOBEK, COMPARATIVE REASONING IN EUROPEAN SUPREME COURTS
   passim (2013) (canvassing the ways in which high courts throughout Europe make
   use of foreign law); RAN HIRSCHL, COMPARATIVE MATTERS: THE RENAISSANCE OF
   COMPARATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL LAW passim (2014) (discussing the frequency with
   which the Canadian Supreme Court and South African Constitutional Court, among
   others, cite foreign law); BASIL MARKESINIS & JÖRG FEDTKE, JUDICIAL RECOURSE TO
   FOREIGN LAW: A NEW SOURCE OF INSPIRATION? 61-108 (2006) (surveying judicial use
   of foreign law in Italy, France, England, Germany, Canada, and South Africa); THE
   USE OF FOREIGN PRECEDENTS BY CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES passim (Tania Groppi &
   Marie-Claire Ponthoreau eds., 2013) (surveying the use of foreign precedent by
   constitutional courts in sixteen countries, including the United States); Ursula Bentele,
   Mining for Gold: The Constitutional Court of South Africa’s Experience with
   Comparative Constitutional Law, 37 GA. J. INT’L & COMP. L. 219, 227, 244 (2009)
   (reporting that over half of the South African Constitutional Court’s decisions over the
   preceding fourteen years cited foreign law, and that “the justices have the benefit of up
   to five clerks selected from applicants around the world”); Brun-Otto Bryde, The
   Constitutional Judge and the International Constitutionalist Dialogue (noting on the
   basis of personal experience as a member of the German Constitutional Court that
   foreign decisions are consulted “extensively,” and that it is standard for the
   preparatory materials relied upon by the Court to incorporate any relevant
   comparative literature that is available in German), in JUDICIAL RECOURSE TO
   FOREIGN LAW: A NEW SOURCE OF INSPIRATION?, supra, at 295, 297-98; Martin Gelter
   & Mathias M. Siems, Language, Legal Origins, and Culture Before the Courts:
   Cross-Citations Between Supreme Courts in Europe, 21 SUP. CT. ECON. REV. 215, 268
   (2013) (concluding on the basis of statistical analysis of private law and criminal law
   decisions by ten European high courts that citation of foreign law “is not an isolated
   phenomenon in Europe but happens on a regular basis”); Johanna Kalb, The Judicial
   Role in New Democracies: A Strategic Account of Comparative Citation, 38 YALE J.
   INT’L L. 423, 424 & n.5, 425 (2013) (citing Uganda, India, South Africa, Japan,
   Namibia, France, Taiwan, and Hungary as examples of countries where courts
   frequently consider foreign and international law in the course of their deliberations);
48                                              《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯


                                                        12
foreign courts in a “global judicial dialogue”               on matters of common
concern has itself become an object of criticism from both foreign
          13                                           14
jurists        and members of the Court itself.              Although references to


   David S. Law & Wen-Chen Chang, The Limits of Global Judicial Dialogue, 86 WASH.
   L. REV. 523, 558-61 (2011) (documenting the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s
   extensive behind-the-scenes usage of foreign law); Eric A. Posner & Cass R. Sunstein,
   The Law of Other States, 59 STAN. L. REV. 131, 135 (2006) (observing that
   “[c]onsultation of foreign law seems to be the rule, not the exception” when national
   courts engage in constitutional interpretation); Cheryl Saunders, Judicial Engagement
   with Comparative Law (“The practice of referring to foreign constitutional experience
   is growing, in terms not only of the number of jurisdictions that engage in it but also
   of the range of comparators on which courts draw.”), in COMPARATIVE
   CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 571, 574, 586 (Tom Ginsburg & Rosalind Dixon eds., 2011);
   Li-ann Thio, Beyond the “Four Walls” in an Age of Transnational Judicial
   Conversations: Civil Liberties, Rights Theories, and Constitutional Adjudication in
   Malaysia and Singapore, 19 COLUM. J. ASIAN L. 428, 431-32, 497-518 (2006) (noting
   a “steady traffic of foreign cases in both Malaysian and Singaporean courts,” but
   observing that the use of foreign law by Singaporean courts tends to be selective and
   to favor “public order concerns” and “statist or communal interests” over the
   protection or expansion of individual rights); Transcript of Interview of U.S. Supreme
   Court Associate Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, April 10, 2009, 70 OHIO ST. L.J. 805,
   820 (2009) [hereinafter Justice Ginsburg Interview] (expressing hope that the Court’s
   reluctance to “take account of international law and... refer to decisions of other
   tribunals” is a “passing phase,” and that the more accepting attitudes of the early
   nineteenth century toward judicial usage of foreign law will return); cf. Brian
   Flanagan & Sinéad Ahern, Judicial Decision-Making and Transnational Law: A
   Survey of Common Law Supreme Court Judges, 60 INT’L & COMP. L.Q. 1, 12-14
   (2011) (noting a “paucity of judges who are on record as sceptics about the use of
   foreign law,” and reporting that, out of forty-three supreme court judges surveyed from
   common law jurisdictions, twenty reported that they “rarely” or “occasionally” referred
   to foreign law in rights-related cases while the remaining twenty-three reported doing
   so “regularly”).
12 E.g., ANNE-MARIE SLAUGHTER, A NEW WORLD ORDER 65-103 (2004) (positing a
   “growing dialogue” among judges “around the world on the issues that arise before
   them”); Law & Chang, supra note 11, at 527, 535-68 (critiquing on both conceptual
   and empirical grounds the use of the “dialogue” metaphor to describe the judicial
   practice of citing foreign law).
13 See L’Heureux-Dubé, supra note 9, at 38-39 (observing that the Supreme Court’s
   failure to engage with relevant jurisprudence from other courts decreases the relevance
   and appeal of its own decisions to other courts); Michelman, supra note 10, at 241
   (observing that the U.S. Supreme Court has “earn[ed] itself a mildly pariah status” by
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                           49
                Approach to Comparativism

foreign law in a succession of high-profile constitutional decisions
toward the tail end of the Rehnquist Court attracted tremendous
           15
attention,      the actual number of constitutional cases in which the Court


   standing “noticeably aloof” from the practice among judiciaries in democratic
   countries of “treating each other’s judgments as required reading”).
14 See, e.g., Ruth Bader Ginsburg, “A Decent Respect to the Opinions of [Human]Kind”:
   The Value of a Comparative Perspective in Constitutional Adjudication, 64
   CAMBRIDGE L.J. 575, 584 (2005) (arguing that it is no more problematic for judges to
   consider foreign law than to consult treatises or legal scholarship, and listing various
   questions on which “comparative law inquiry could prove enlightening or valuable”);
   Justice Ginsburg Interview, supra note 11, at 820; Sandra Day O’Connor, Broadening
   Our Horizons: Why American Lawyers Must Learn About Foreign Law, 45 FED. LAW.
   20, 20-21 (1998) (“[O]ther common law courts which have struggled with the same
   basic constitutional questions... have something to teach us.... Our flexibility, our
   ability to borrow ideas from other legal systems, is what will enable us to remain
   progressive, with systems that are able to cope with a rapidly shrinking world.”);
   William Rehnquist, Constitutional Courts - Comparative Remarks (“[N]ow that
   constitutional law is solidly grounded in so many countries, it is time that the United
   States courts begin looking to the decisions of other constitutional courts to aid in
   their own deliberative process. The United States courts, and legal scholarship in our
   own country generally, have been somewhat laggard in relying on comparative law
   and decisions of other countries.”), in GERMANY AND ITS BASIC LAW: PAST, PRESENT
   AND FUTURE — A GERMAN-AMERICAN SYMPOSIUM 411, 412 (Paul Kirchhof &
   Donald P. Kommers eds., 1993); Jeffrey Toobin, Swing Shift: How Anthony Kennedy’s
   Passion for Foreign Law Could Change the Supreme Court, NEW YORKER, Sept. 12,
   2005, at 42, 50 (“If we are asking the rest of the world to adopt our idea of freedom, it
   does seem to me that there may be some mutuality there, that other nations and other
   peoples can define and interpret freedom in a way that's at least instructive to us....
   Liberty isn’t for export only.” (quoting Justice Kennedy)); Stephen Breyer & Antonin
   Scalia, Assoc. Justices, Supreme Court of the United States, A Conversation on the
   Relevance of Foreign Law for American Constitutional Adjudication, Discussion at
   the American University Washington College of Law ( Jan. 13, 2005) (disclosing
   Justice Breyer’s view that it is “important” for the Justices to show other courts that
   “we read their opinions”); Stephen Breyer, Assoc. Justice, Supreme Court of the
   United States, The Supreme Court and the New International Law, Address to the
   97th Annual Meeting of the American Society of International Law (Apr. 4, 2003),
   available at http://www.supremecourt.gov/publicinfo/speeches/viewspeech/sp_04-04-
   03 (“Ultimately, I believe the ‘comparativist’ view that several of us have enunciated
   will carry the day — simply because of the enormous value in any discipline of trying
   to learn from the similar experience of others.”).
15 See David S. Law, Generic Constitutional Law, 89 MINN. L. REV. 652, 653-57 (2005)
50                                              《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



cites foreign law remains very low in absolute terms and may even be
declining. From 1986 through 2010, less than 0.3% of opinions in
constitutional cases — majority, concurring, and dissenting alike —
                            16
cited foreign case law.          Moreover, all of the citations that did occur
date back to the Rehnquist Court; none occurred during the first six
                                 17
years of the Roberts Court.           Nor is there reason to suspect that the U.S.
Supreme Court routinely consults foreign law in the course of its
                                                             18
deliberations without revealing that it has done so.


   (noting the controversy over judicial citation of foreign law in constitutional cases
   decided mostly in the late 1990s and early 2000s, such as Atkins v. Virginia, 536 U.S.
   304 (2002); Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558 (2003); and Printz v. United States, 521
   U.S. 898 (1997)); see also, e.g., Steven G. Calabresi & Stephanie Dotson Zimdahl,
   The Supreme Court and Foreign Sources of Law: Two Hundred Years of Practice and
   the Juvenile Death Penalty Decision, 47 WM. & MARY L. REV. 743, 755 (2005)
   (arguing that the importance of the constitutional cases in which the Supreme Court
   cites foreign law has risen over time).
16 See Angioletta Sperti, United States of America: First Cautious Attempts of Judicial
   Use of Foreign Precedents in the Supreme Court’s Jurisprudence, in THE USE OF
   FOREIGN PRECEDENTS BY CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES, supra note 11, at 393, 405. That
   figure includes citations to specific foreign decisions in concurring opinions but
   excludes references to international law and non-country-specific references to
   foreign practices, such as the “law of nations.” Id. at 395-98; see also Sarah K.
   Harding, Comparative Reasoning and Judicial Review, 28 YALE J. INT’L L. 409, 419-
   20 (2003) (finding “a remarkably low number” of U.S. Supreme Court cases over the
   preceding decade “in which there is even a passing reference to foreign law or legal
   practice”); David Zaring, The Use of Foreign Decisions by Federal Courts: An
   Empirical Analysis, 3 J. EMPIRICAL LEGAL STUD. 297, 299, 314 (2006) (noting that, in
   absolute terms, “the Supreme Court uses less foreign law now than it has at any other
   time in its history,” and that “the federal courts as a whole” are not “citing foreign
   tribunals any more frequently now than they were 60 years ago—once the increase in
   the total number of opinions is accounted for”).
17 See Sperti, supra note 16, at 405; see also Antonin Scalia, Commentary, 40 ST. LOUIS
   U. L.J. 1119, 1121 (1996) (“[I]n a very few instances in the less-distant past, the
   United States Supreme Court has looked to international ‘human rights’ norms in
   determining whether certain forms of punishment violated our Eighth Amendment....
   But this approach, however, even within its limited scope of application, was short-
   lived and has now been retired.”).
18 Although many courts make a habit of researching and considering foreign law
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                           51
                Approach to Comparativism

      Vast quantities of ink have been spilled over the normative question
                                                                                         19
of whether, and in what ways, courts ought to engage with foreign law.


   without divulging in their opinions that they do so, see infra Part I, those courts tend
   for a variety of reasons to be civil law courts. See infra notes 52-53 and
   accompanying text (discussing citation conventions among civil law courts). By
   contrast, the opinions rendered by common law courts tend to be relatively
   transparent about the sources taken into consideration. See, e.g., Michel Bastarache,
   How Internationalization of the Law Has Materialized in Canada, 59 U. NEW
   BRUNSWICK L.J. 190, 200 (2009) (reporting that “attribution is systematic and
   considered mandatory” whenever the Canadian Supreme Court draws upon foreign
   jurisprudence); Law & Chang, supra note 11, at 533 & nn.33-35 (discussing, and
   rejecting, the possibility that the Canadian Supreme Court “looks habitually to the
   South African Constitutional Court for guidance and inspiration” but simply fails to
   acknowledge when it has done so). But see Roger Alford, Outsourcing Research
   About Outsourced Authority, OPINIO JURIS (Nov. 22, 2006, 10:43 AM),
   http://opiniojuris.org/2006/11/22/outsourcing-research-about-outsourced-authority/
   (noting the number of research requests received by the Library of Congress from
   “judicial agencies” pertaining to foreign election law and constitutional court
   decisions, and concluding that “even in cases... that did not cite foreign authority[,] it
   appears the Court considered foreign experiences in rendering its decision, and relied
   on the Library of Congress to provide that information”).
19 See, e.g., VICKI C. JACKSON, CONSTITUTIONAL ENGAGEMENT IN A TRANSNATIONAL
   ERA 17-102 (2010) (advocating a judicial posture of “engagement,” as opposed to
   “resistance” or “convergence,” toward foreign law); MARKESINIS & FEDTKE, supra
   note 11, at 109-65 (proposing various criteria for judicial use of foreign law);
   SLAUGHTER, supra note 12, at 65-103 (arguing that participation in a global
   “community of courts” and “common judicial enterprise” enables judges to “learn
   from one another’s experience and reasoning” and thus improve the quality of their
   decisionmaking); JEREMY WALDRON, “PARTLY LAWS COMMON TO ALL MANKIND”:
   FOREIGN LAW IN AMERICAN COURTS 3 (2012) (arguing that “sometimes it is
   appropriate for our courts to make use of foreign legal materials”); Roger P. Alford,
   Four Mistakes in the Debate on “Outsourcing Authority,” 69 ALB. L. REV. 653, 658-
   61 (2006) (listing various “heavy-weights” on both “the left and right” who have
   offered arguments for and against judicial citation of foreign law, and observing that
   the debate has “spilled over into contemporary political parlors”); Michael Kirby,
   Transnational Judicial Dialogue, Internationalisation of Law and Australian Judges,
   9 MELB. J. INT’L L. 171, 184 (2008) (arguing that “[i]nternational engagement” can
   help judges to “enhance their service to their own courts, enlarge their thinking and
   improve the efficiency of their judicial service”); Law, supra note 15, at 653-59
   (providing an overview of the heated normative debate over the propriety of the
   Supreme Court’s use of comparative analysis in constitutional cases); Law & Versteeg,
52                                              《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



Rarely, however, have scholars writing in this vein broached the
empirical question of why some courts make greater use of foreign law
              20
than others.       The question is not as easily answered as it might appear.
Two of the explanations that come most readily to mind — namely,
isolationism on the part of judges, and political controversy over the use
of foreign law — prove inadequate, especially when courts outside the
United States are considered.

      1. The judicial isolationism hypothesis. — It is tempting to think
that judicial reluctance to use foreign law might simply reflect
isolationism or parochialism on the part of judges, but there are several
problems with this explanation. First, it is somewhat circular. To say that
some judges refuse to engage with foreign law because they are
isolationist is akin to saying that some people tend to vote Republican
because they are Republicans. Labeling behavior is not the same as
explaining behavior. Even if there are judges who can be described in
some sense as isolationist, that merely begs the question of why they
hold such views while others do not.

   supra note 6, at 1166 (noting the “extensive, if not tiresome, normative debate” over
   judicial citation of foreign and international law, and citing numerous examples);
   L’Heureux-Dubé, supra note 9, at 40 (exhorting the U.S. Supreme Court to join in the
   “global dialogue on human rights and other common legal questions” by considering
   the decisions of courts elsewhere); see also Antonin Scalia, Outsourcing American
   Law: Foreign Law in Constitutional Interpretation 5 (Am. Enter. Inst., Working Paper
   No. 152, 2009), available at http://www.aei.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/10/200908
   20-Chapter2.pdf (lamenting that the citation of foreign law in constitutional cases
   appears to be the “wave of the future”).
20 See HIRSCHL, supra note 11, at 40 (observing that, “despite the tremendous scholarly
   interest in the international migration of constitutional ideas, the actual empirical
   evidence on the nature and scope of reference to foreign law . . . remains thin”); Ryan
   C. Black & Lee Epstein, (Re-)Setting the Scholarly Agenda on Transjudicial
   Communication, 32 LAW & SOC. INQUIRY 789, 791, 792 (2007) (urging “empirically
   minded” scholars to remedy the lack of “rigorous theoretical and empirical research
   devoted to understanding the exchange of law among nations”).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                         53
                Approach to Comparativism

      Second, the extent to which judges engage with the rest of the
world does not appear to play a crucial role in determining whether they
will practice comparativism. Foreign interaction is neither necessary nor
sufficient for comparativism to occur. On the one hand, comparativism
can be a routine occurrence even if foreign interaction is restricted, as
                                                                              21
shown by the example of the Taiwanese Constitutional Court.                        On the
other hand, frequent interaction with foreign courts and foreign judges
does not guarantee a thriving practice of comparativism. For evidence of
this fact, we need look no further than the U.S. Supreme Court, which is
well connected to foreign courts but nevertheless shuns comparativism.
Across the ideological spectrum, the Justices are in high demand
internationally as both guests and hosts, and they do not turn their backs
on the rest of the world. Indeed, the Court hosts overseas visitors so
often that it has developed the equivalent of a diplomatic office for
                       22
dealing with them.

      Nor is it only the advocates of comparativism who enjoy foreign
           23
contact.        Even Justices known for their opposition to comparative



21 See infra Sections IV.B & IV.E (juxtaposing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s
   habitual usage of foreign law with its heavily restricted opportunities for engagement
   with foreign courts).
22 See SLAUGHTER, supra note 12, at 98-99 (describing “the formation of an actual
   ‘foreign policy’ arm of the U.S. federal judiciary” in the form of the Committee on
   International Judicial Relations); International Judicial Relations, FED. JUD. CENTER,
   http://www.fjc.gov/ijr/home.nsf/page/intl_activities (last visited Feb. 28, 2015)
   [http://perma.cc/9N7V-8U3F] (describing the Federal Judicial Center’s international
   activities and Office of International Judicial Relations).
23 See sources cited supra note 14 (quoting Justices Breyer, Ginsburg, and O’Connor,
   and the late Chief Justice Rehnquist). In the specific context of treaty interpretation,
   even Justice Scalia has advocated a comparativist approach. See Alford, supra note 19,
   at 657 & n. 23 (citing Olympic Airways v. Husain, 540 U.S. 644, 660-61 (2004)
   (Scalia, J., dissenting)).
54                                              《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯


                           24
constitutional analysis         frequently visit foreign courts and participate in
                                25
international conferences.           As unlikely as it might be for Justice Scalia
to cite Taiwanese constitutional precedent, for example, he is one of the
few jurists from anywhere in the world to have visited the Taiwanese
                                          26
Constitutional Court in person.                Indeed, the globetrotting Justice


24 See Law, supra note 15, at 655-56 (quoting various opinions by Justices Scalia and
   Thomas critical of foreign law usage); Tim Wu, Foreign Exchange: Should the
   Supreme Court Care What Other Countries Think?, SLATE (Apr. 9, 2004, 5:03 PM),
   http://slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/jurisprudence/2004/04/foreign_exchange.h
   tml [http://perma.cc/FAD8-XSYR] (likening the exchanges within the Court over the
   use of foreign legal materials to “a Punch and Judy show,” in which “[j]ust about
   every time the court cites foreign materials, Scalia and/or Clarence Thomas dissent”).
   But cf. MARKESINIS & FEDTKE, supra note 11, at 60-61 (quoting Justice Scalia’s
   discussion of Australian, Canadian, and English election law in McIntyre v. Ohio
   Elections Commission, 514 U.S. 334, 381-82 (1995), and querying “how... a judge
   who denounces so strongly references to foreign law when opposing moves to
   decriminalise sodomy or restrict the application of the death penalty [can] nonetheless
   invoke foreign examples himself”); Ryan C. Black et al., Upending Global Debate:
   An Empirical Analysis of the U.S. Supreme Court’s Use of Transnational Law to
   Interpret Domestic Doctrine, 103 GEO. L.J. 1, 32 tbl.4 (2014) (finding empirically that,
   through 2008, Justice Scalia referred to foreign countries and foreign tribunals more
   often than Justice Breyer); Anne-Marie Slaughter, A Brave New Judicial World
   (noting Justice Scalia’s insistence that American judges “look to the national decisions
   of other treaty parties” when interpreting international treaties, and citing Justice
   Scalia’s dissent in Olympic Airways v. Husain, 540 U.S. 644 (2004), as an example),
   in AMERICAN EXCEPTIONALISM AND HUMAN RIGHTS, supra note 5, at 277, 283.
25 See Scalia, supra note 17, at 1122 (“I welcome international conferences... in which
   the judges of various countries may exchange useful insights and information....”);
   Jada F. Smith, Royalties and Teaching Help Fill Bank Accounts of Justices, Report
   Says, N.Y. TIMES, June 21, 2014, at A16 (noting that, while Justice Breyer “traveled to
   the most foreign countries,” Justice Scalia “took more trips than any of his colleagues
   in 2013, filing for reimbursement on 28 excursions, including one to Peru, one to
   Germany and two trips to Italy”); Bill Mears, Justices’ Finances Show Overseas
   Travel, Book Royalties, Gifts, CNN.COM ( June 20, 2012, 5:51 PM),
   http://www.cnn.com/2012/06/20/us/scotus-justices-finances [http://perma.cc/LQ7A-
   SGPT] (describing all of the justices as “busy travelers,” revealing that Justice Scalia
   is “neck-and-neck” with Justice Breyer in the extent of his overseas travel, and noting
   Justice Thomas’s participation together with Justice Kagan at an international legal
   conference in Argentina).
26 See Law & Chang, supra note 11, at 555.
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                          55
                Approach to Comparativism

                                                           27
Scalia — who once taught comparative law                        — is second only to
                                                                28
Justice Breyer in the extent of his foreign travel.                  In short, whatever
reasons certain members of the Court may have for denouncing the use
                                               29
of foreign law in constitutional cases,             those reasons do not stem from
a lack of foreign contact or rank xenophobia.

      2. The political controversy hypothesis. — Alternatively, it might be
argued that the degree of judicial comparativism depends on the degree
of political controversy surrounding it. Perhaps the strongest evidence in
favor of this hypothesis comes from the United States, where judicial
aversion to foreign law coincides with unusually intense opposition to
                   30
comparativism.          Justices who dare to cite foreign law have faced calls
                                                    31
for impeachment and even death threats,                  while nominees to the Court


27 See Nomination of Judge Antonin Scalia, to Be Associate Justice of the Supreme
   Court of the United States: Hearings Before the S. Comm. on the Judiciary, 99th
   Cong. 3 (1986) (statement of Sen. John Warner) (summarizing then-Judge Scalia’s
   teaching experience at the University of Virginia).
28 See Smith, supra note 25; Mears, supra note 25 (describing Justice Scalia as “neck-
   and-neck” with Justice Breyer in the extent of his overseas travel, as revealed by their
   financial disclosure forms).
29 See Law, supra note 15, at 655-56 (quoting various criticisms leveled by Justice
   Scalia against other members of the Court for citing foreign law).
30 Compare, e.g., KEN I. KERSCH, CONSTRUCTING CIVIL LIBERTIES: DISCONTINUITIES IN
   THE DEVELOPMENT OF AMERICAN CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 103-11 (2004) (describing
   how “judicial flirtation with treaties and international human rights agreements” in the
   years immediately following World War II “occasioned a swift and serious political
   response,” including calls for a constitutional amendment to limit the Treaty Power),
   MARKESINIS & FEDTKE, supra note 11, at 55 (describing the tone of the American
   debate over judicial comparativism as “surprisingly strident”), and Alford, supra note
   19, at 664 (noting a “groundswell of opposition” in the United States to constitutional
   comparativism “from various corners and for a variety of reasons”), with, e.g.,
   HIRSCHL, supra note 11, at 30, 141 (noting that the practice of citing foreign law “has
   never been seriously contested” in Canada).
31 See, e.g., Ginsburg, supra note 14, at 581-82 (noting various congressional bills and
   resolutions against the use of foreign law by the federal courts, and quoting the death
   threat made against Justice O’Connor and Ginsburg for their support of
56                                             《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



now take care to disavow the use of foreign law in constitutional
                  32
interpretation.        Meanwhile, a nationwide campaign to enact laws
limiting or prohibiting judicial usage of foreign law continues to gain
                                                                        33
traction. As of this writing, legislatures in thirty-four states             as well as


   comparativism); Law, supra note 15, at 657 n.17 (citing examples of negative
   political and popular reaction to citation of foreign law by members of the Court).
32 See, e.g., Alford, supra note 19, at 680 (“[A] judge's willingness to rely on
   comparative experiences in constitutional interpretation quickly has become an
   important test for many senators in judging a judicial nominee's qualifications.”);
   Ronald J. Krotoszynski, Jr., The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle and the Challenge
   of Resisting — or Engaging — Transnational Constitutional Law, 66 ALA. L. REV.
   105, 110 n. 24 (2014) (citing the confirmation hearings of Chief Justice Roberts and
   Justices Alito, Sotomayor, and Kagan); David M. Herszenhorn, Court Nominee
   Criticized As Relying on Foreign Law, N.Y. TIMES, June 26, 2009, at A13 (reporting
   on congressional criticism of public remarks by then-Judge Sotomayor that were
   supportive of comparativism).
33 Support for the campaign appears to draw upon a combination of preexisting opposition
   to judicial usage of foreign law in general and animus directed at Islamic law in
   particular. See FAIZA PATEL ET AL., CTR. FOR AM. PROGRESS & BRENNAN CTR. FOR
   JUSTICE, FOREIGN LAW BANS: LEGAL UNCERTAINTIES AND PRACTICAL PROBLEMS 1-13
   (2013), available at https://www.brennancenter.org/sites/default/files/publications/
   ForeignLawBans.pdf; Kimberly Railey, More States Move to Ban Foreign Law, USA
   TODAY, Aug. 5, 2013, at 4A. The thirty-four states where laws against judicial use of
   foreign law have been introduced or enacted as of this writing are Alabama, where
   voters have passed a constitutional amendment placed on the ballot by the legislature,
   S.B. 4, 2013 Leg., Reg. Sess. (Ala. 2013); Alaska, H.B. 88, 27th Leg., 2d Sess.
   (Alaska 2011) (lapsed due to committee inaction); Arizona, where legislation was
   enacted in 2011, ARIZ. REV. STAT. § 12-3103 (2011); Arkansas, H.B. 1348, 89th Gen.
   Assemb., Reg. Sess. (Ark. 2013) (lapsed due to committee inaction); Florida, FLA.
   STAT. § 61.0401 (2014); Georgia, S. Res. 808, 152d Gen. Assemb., 2d Reg. Sess. (Ga.
   2014) (committee proceedings pending); Idaho, which passed a nonbinding resolution,
   H. Con. Res. 44, 60th Leg., 2d Reg. Sess. (Idaho 2010); Indiana, S.B. 460, 118th Gen.
   Assemb., Reg. Sess. (Ind. 2013); Iowa, H.F. 76, 85th Gen. Assemb., Reg. Sess. (Iowa
   2013); Kansas, where legislation was enacted in 2012, KAN. STAT. ANN. § 60-5103
   (2012); Kentucky, H.B. 43, 2014 Leg., Reg. Sess (Ky. 2014); Louisiana, where
   legislation was enacted in 2010, LA. REV. STAT. ANN. § 9:6001 (2010); Maine, H.P.
   811, 125th Leg., 1st Reg. Sess. (Me. 2011); Michigan, H.B. 4769, 96th Leg., Reg.
   Sess. (Mich. 2011); Minnesota, where the bill in question was withdrawn by its author,
   S.F. 2281, 87th Leg., Reg. Sess. (Minn. 2012); Mississippi, H.B. 44, 129th Leg., Reg.
   Sess. (Miss. 2014); Missouri, where a bill passed by the legislature was vetoed by the
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                        57
                Approach to Comparativism

            34
Congress          have considered taking measures against judicial
comparativism; in ten states, some version of a ban has already passed
                  35
the legislature.       Not surprisingly, experimental evidence suggests that
citation of foreign law may undermine rather than bolster public
                                                36
acceptance of Supreme Court opinions.

      It is not difficult to imagine that such pressure might have an effect
on the Justices. Time and time again, the Supreme Court has



   governor, S.B. 267, 97th Gen. Assemb., 1st Reg. Sess. (Mo. 2013); H.B. 757, 97th
   Gen. Assemb., 1st Reg. Sess (Mo. 2013); Nebraska, Leg. B. 647, 102d Leg., 1st Reg.
   Sess. (Neb. 2011); New Hampshire, H.B. 1422, 2011 Gen. Court, 162d Sess. (N.H.
   2011); New Jersey, where the bill in question was withdrawn, Assemb. B. 3496, 214th
   Leg., Reg. Sess. (N.J. 2010); New Mexico, S.J. Res. 14, 50th Leg., 2d Reg. Sess.
   (N.M. 2012) (lapsed due to committee inaction); North Carolina, 2013 N.C. Sess.
   Laws 416; Oklahoma, which enacted a ban in 2013, OKLA. STAT. tit. 12, § 20 (2013);
   Pennsylvania, H.B. 2029, 195th Gen. Assemb., Reg. Sess. (Pa. 2011); South Carolina,
   S. 60, 120th Gen. Assemb., 1st Reg. Sess. (S.C. 2013); S. 81, 120th Gen. Assemb., 1st
   Reg. Sess. (S.C. 2013); South Dakota, which passed a law in 2012, S.D. CODIFIED
   LAWS § 19-8-7 (2012); Tennessee, which passed legislation in 2010, TENN. CODE.
   ANN. § 20-15-102 (2010); Texas, H.B. 288, 83d Leg., Reg. Sess. (Tex. 2012); S. 1639,
   83d Leg., Reg. Sess. (Tex. 2013); Utah, H.B. 296, 58th Leg., Gen. Sess. (Utah 2010);
   Vermont, S. 265, 2014 Leg., Reg. Sess. (Vt. 2014); Virginia, H.B. 1322, 2013 Gen.
   Assemb., Reg. Sess. (Va. 2013); Washington, which enacted a law in 2013, WASH.
   REV. CODE § 2.28.165(4)-(6) (2013); West Virginia, H.R. 2216, 2013 Leg., Reg. Sess.
   (W. Va. 2014); and Wyoming, H.J. Res. 0005, 62d Leg., Reg. Sess. (Wyo. 2013); H.J.
   Res. 0004, 62d Leg., Reg. Sess. (Wyo. 2013).
34 See Law, supra note 15, at 656 n.16 (citing various bills and resolutions introduced in
   Congress).
35 The ten states in question are Alabama (where legislative action has placed a
   constitutional amendment on the ballot), Arizona, Idaho (where the legislature passed a
   nonbinding resolution), Missouri (where the law was vetoed by the governor), Kansas,
   Louisiana, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Dakota, and Tennessee. See supra note
   33 (citing the relevant bills and resolutions).
36 See Brett Curry & Banks Miller, Looking for Law in All the Wrong Places? Foreign
   Law and Support for the U.S. Supreme Court, 36 POL. & POL’Y 1094, 1107-08 (2008)
   (reporting the results of an experiment conducted upon undergraduate students in
   which citation of foreign law in fabricated Supreme Court decisions decreased
   support for the Court among subjects with low levels of political knowledge).
58                                               《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯


                                                                37
demonstrated its sensitivity both to public opinion                  and to the elected
           38
branches.       In reality, however, the Justices do not behave as if they are
simply slaves to public opinion, as evidenced by the fact that a number
                                                                                    39
of them have made a point of publicly advocating comparativism.                          If
their goal is truly to avoid controversy or criticism, the last thing they
should do is take a public stand in favor of something very controversial.
Yet this is precisely what some of them do, and the political controversy
hypothesis cannot easily account for their behavior.

      The behavior of courts in other countries is even harder for the
political controversy hypothesis to explain. In East Asia, popular and
political attitudes toward comparativism do not vary much from country
to country, yet there are significant variations in the level of foreign law


37 The Supreme Court’s responsiveness to public opinion has been repeatedly
   documented by political scientists, see, e.g., KERSCH, supra note 30, at 110 (noting
   that “virulent political reaction” and “critical commentary” against judicial use of
   treaties to advance human rights led courts to abandon “bold reasoning” that deemed
   treaties such as the U.N. Charter to be self-executing); Robert A. Dahl, Decision-
   Making in a Democracy: The Supreme Court as a National Policy-Maker, 6 J. PUB. L.
   279, 285 (1957) (finding that “the policy views dominant on the Court are never for
   long out of line with the policy views dominant among the lawmaking majorities of
   the United States”); Terri Peretti, An Empirical Analysis of Alexander Bickel’s The
   Least Dangerous Branch (surveying the literature, and noting findings to the effect that
   the Court may follow public opinion more closely than Congress), in THE JUDICIARY
   AND AMERICAN DEMOCRACY: ALEXANDER BICKEL, THE COUNTERMAJORITARIAN
   DIFFICULTY, AND CONTEMPORARY CONSTITUTIONAL THEORY 123, 130-33 (Kenneth D.
   Ward & Cecilia R. Castillo eds., 2005), and more recently by legal scholars as well,
   see BARRY FRIEDMAN, THE WILL OF THE PEOPLE: HOW PUBLIC OPINION HAS
   INFLUENCED THE SUPREME COURT AND SHAPED THE MEANING OF THE CONSTITUTION
   passim (2009).
38 See ANNA HARVEY, A MERE MACHINE: THE SUPREME COURT, CONGRESS, AND
   AMERICAN DEMOCRACY passim (2013) (showing empirically the extent to which the
   Court defers to congressional preferences, particularly those of the House of
   Representatives).
39 See supra note 14 (quoting Justices Breyer, Ginsburg, and O’Connor and the late
   Chief Justice Rehnquist).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                          59
                Approach to Comparativism

usage. Japan, Korea, Taiwan, and Hong Kong share similarly welcoming
attitudes toward foreign law, yet the Japanese Supreme Court makes
much less use of foreign law than the Korean or Taiwanese
                                                                                        40
Constitutional Court or the Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal.
Because the level of comparativism varies even when the degree of
controversy surrounding it does not, the degree of controversy obviously
cannot explain the variation in the level of comparativism.

     This is not to suggest that political controversy has no effect on the
practice of judicial comparativism. But it is never the only factor at play,
and in many countries, it is not even an important factor. The role of
institutional    factors,        by   contrast,    is   widely      overlooked        and
underestimated. Legal scholars and political scientists alike tend to
depict judicial behavior as a function of the legal views and policy
preferences that judges hold, subject to constraints imposed by the
                            41
political environment.           Yet the structure and practices of institutions

40 See infra Sections II.B, III.B, IV.B, V.B (discussing attitudes toward comparativism
   and levels of comparativism in Japan, Korea, Taiwan, and Hong Kong).
41 See, e.g., RICHARD H. FALLON, JR., THE DYNAMIC CONSTITUTION: AN INTRODUCTION
   TO AMERICAN CONSTITUTIONAL LAW AND PRACTICE, at xii (2d ed.                 2013) (“To
   generalize grossly, law professors have tended to view the Justices as driven by felt
   obligations of fidelity to distinctively legal ideals, while political scientists have
   regarded them as ideologically motivated actors with political agendas.”); id. at xvii
   (acknowledging “the now familiar insight that loosely ‘political’ values and concerns
   influence Supreme Court decision making”); JEFFREY A. SEGAL & HAROLD J. SPAETH,
   THE SUPREME COURT AND THE ATTITUDINAL MODEL REVISITED 48-114 (2002)
   (contrasting the “legal model” of Supreme Court decisionmaking, which holds that
   judicial decisions are “substantially influenced” by a combination of case-specific
   facts and governing law, with the “attitudinal model,” which holds that “the Supreme
   Court decides disputes in light of the facts of the case vis-à-vis the ideological
   attitudes and values of the justices,” and the “rational choice model,” which holds that
   the justices pursue a broad range of goals in strategic ways); Keith E. Whittington,
   Once More Unto the Breach: PostBehavioralist Approaches to Judicial Politics, 25
   LAW & SOC. INQUIRY 601, 629 (2000) (noting that emphasis on the “sharp dichotomy”
   between legal and political explanations for judicial behavior has been “most
60                                             《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



such as courts and law schools also have profound effects on the
                                                                    42
preferences and capabilities of judges and lawyers.                      Judicial and
popular attitudes may help to explain whether judges want to engage in
comparativism, but they cannot explain how those attitudes arose in the
first place. Nor do those attitudes determine whether judges are even
capable of practicing comparativism. For answers to such questions, we
must also consider the implications of the institutional environment for
judicial behavior.

      This Article argues that a combination of symbiotic institutional
factors must exist in order for judicial comparativism to thrive. The first
factor is institutional capacity: a court that lacks the institutional capacity
to learn about foreign law is, in a literal sense, incapable of engaging in
comparativism in more than ad hoc fashion. Institutional capacity may
not be a sufficient condition for comparativism to occur, but it is a
necessary condition. The second factor, without which the first cannot
exist, is a system of legal education that values and inculcates the
practice of comparativism. High levels of judicial engagement with
foreign law are dependent upon the availability of institutional
mechanisms for learning about foreign law, such as the availability of
clerks or researchers with foreign legal expertise. Such mechanisms are


   pronounced when scholars of the Court are engaged in competition over models of
   judicial behavior”).
42 See, e.g., James G. March & Johan P. Olsen, The New Institutionalism: Organizational
   Factors in Political Life, 78 AM. POL. SCI. REV. 734, 789 (1984) (contrasting
   mainstream political science, which treats preferences as exogenous, with “new
   institutionalism,” which argues that preferences develop “through a combination of
   education, indoctrination, and experience” and emphasizes the role of institutions in
   inculcating preferences); Whittington, supra note 41, at 615 (“Individuals cannot be
   conceptualized as autonomous, free choosers who just happen to find themselves in a
   particular institutional context. Institutions do not merely impose constraints on
   choices; they constitute preferences.”).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                         61
                Approach to Comparativism

unlikely to be effective, in turn, unless they are backed by a system of
legal education that produces an adequate supply of lawyers with both
the ability and the desire to engage in comparativism.

     The effects of institutional variation can be observed only by
studying institutions that actually vary from one another. In other words,
the study of judicial comparativism requires a comparative approach.
The heart of this Article, therefore, is an in-depth look at the operation of
the most prominent constitutional courts in East Asia, an increasingly
important region of the world that nevertheless receives relatively little
                       43
scholarly attention.        The specific courts in question are the Japanese


43 See, e.g., HIRSCHL, supra note 11, at 4, 17, 163, 211-13 (noting the “near-exclusive
   focus” of the field of comparative constitutional law on “a small number of
   overanalyzed, ‘usual suspect’ constitutional settings or court rulings” drawn from “a
   dozen liberal democracies,” and the resultant fact that the “constitutional experiences
   of entire regions,” including much of Asia, “remain largely uncharted terrain,
   understudied and generally overlooked”); MARK TUSHNET, ADVANCED INTRODUCTION
   TO COMPARATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 5 (2014) (suggesting that “South and East
   Asia are relatively neglected areas of study” “[p]artly because of language issues”);
   Sujit Choudhry, Bridging Comparative Politics and Comparative Constitutional Law:
   Constitutional Design in Divided Societies (observing that “[f]or nearly two decades,”
   the comparative constitutional law literature has been “oriented around a standard and
   relatively limited set of cases: South Africa, Israel, Germany, Canada, the United
   Kingdom, New Zealand, the United States, and to a lesser extent, India”), in
   CONSTITUTIONAL DESIGN FOR DIVIDED SOCIETIES: INTEGRATION OR ACCOMMODATION?
   3, 8 (Sujit Choudhry ed., 2008); Rosalind Dixon & Tom Ginsburg, Introduction to
   RESEARCH HANDBOOK ON COMPARATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 1, 13 (Tom Ginsburg
   & Rosalind Dixon eds., 2011) (“It is probably the case that 90% of comparative work
   in the English language covers the same ten countries, for which materials are easily
   accessible in English.”);Norman Dorsen, The Relevance of Foreign Legal Materials
   in U.S. Constitutional Cases: A Conversation Between Justice Antonin Scalia and
   Justice Stephen Breyer, 3 INT’L. J. CONST. L. 519, 530 (2005) [hereinafter Scalia-
   Breyer Conversation] (“We have referred to opinions of India’s Supreme Court. But I
   confess that fewer opinions from other Asian nations come to our attention.” (quoting
   Justice Breyer)); see also, e.g., Andrew Harding & Peter Leyland, Preface to
   CONSTITUTIONAL COURTS: A COMPARATIVE STUDY, at v-vi (Andrew Harding & Peter
   Leyland eds., 2009) (introducing a collection consisting of eight chapters on European
62                                              《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



Supreme Court (JSC), the Korean Constitutional Court (KCC), the
Taiwanese Constitutional Court (TCC), and the Hong Kong Court of
Final Appeal (HKCFA). Although Asian courts do not have a reputation
                                        44
for engaging in comparativism,               the reality is that all four of these
courts make substantially greater use of foreign law than the U.S.
Supreme Court.

      Investigation of these courts sheds light on not only the institutional
mechanisms, but also the hidden motivations behind judicial
comparativism. Interviews with numerous judges and other officials
disclose that courts practice comparativism not only to enrich or justify
their decisions, but also to pursue what might best be described as
                        45
judicial diplomacy.          Courts engage in a variety of activities, ranging


   courts, three on African courts (including one on South Africa), two on Asian courts,
   and one survey chapter on Latin American courts, and acknowledging explicitly that
   the selection of courts was constrained by “the availability of scholars with the
   appropriate interest and expertise”); JUDICIAL INDEPENDENCE IN THE AGE OF
   DEMOCRACY: CRITICAL PERSPECTIVES FROM AROUND THE WORLD (Peter H. Russell
   & David M. O’Brien eds., 2001) (containing six chapters on European jurisdictions,
   five chapters on former British territories, and only two chapters on other
   jurisdictions — namely, one on Japan and one on Central America); MARKESINIS &
   FEDTKE, supra note 11, at 62-108 (analyzing the use of comparative law in Italy,
   France, England, Germany, Canada, and South Africa).
44 See Wen-Chen Chang & Jiunn-Rong Yeh, Internationalization of Constitutional Law
   (reporting that there is “little judicial dialogue” in Asia, and that Asian courts tend
   either to refrain from engaging in “explicit comparative analysis” or to focus on a
   narrow set of “common law jurisdictions,” depending upon whether they hail from a
   civil law or common law tradition), in THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF COMPARATIVE
   CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 1165, 1173, 1176 (Michel Rosenfeld & András Sajó eds., 2012);
   Tom Ginsburg, Eastphalia as the Perfection of Westphalia, 17 IND. J. GLOBAL LEGAL
   STUD. 27, 33 (2010) (noting the grudging approach of Japanese courts to the domestic
   application of international law, and describing the resistance offered in the name of
   “Asian values” to the “liberal universalism” of rights discourse).
45 See Alford, supra note 19, at 669-70 (observing that, for the first time ever, “we have
   Supreme Court Justices who are… actively embracing global constitutionalism in an
   effort to perform functions akin to foreign diplomats,” and citing Justices Breyer and
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                            63
                Approach to Comparativism

from translation of their own opinions and citation of foreign law to
engagement with international organizations, that are not aimed simply
at crafting stronger opinions or winning over domestic audiences. These
activities also constitute strategies for competing or cooperating with
other courts in pursuit of political, economic, and diplomatic objectives.
Comparativism is part of a repertoire of judicial strategies for achieving
goals of an international character.

     Part I explains the methodology behind this Article and the
measurement challenges that it is designed to address. On the one hand,
a full account of how and why courts engage in comparativism cannot be
gathered simply by reading judicial decisions. Quantitative data
collection that relies on the coding of judicial opinions is particularly
inadequate because many courts do not disclose in their opinions the
extent of their foreign legal research. On the other hand, a qualitative
case study approach runs into the problem that it can be difficult to
generalize from a small number of cases. This Article responds to these
challenges by combining extensive interview-based research with a case
selection strategy designed to isolate the effect of particular variables.


   Kennedy as examples); Ken I. Kersch, The Supreme Court and International
   Relations Theory, 69 ALB. L. REV. 771, 774-75, 787 (2006) (observing that “the
   justices may frequently understand themselves as diplomats, representing American
   values and explaining American practices to what is often an ignorant, misinformed, or
   hostile world,” and that the tendency of legal scholars to treat the “‘globalist’ turn” in
   deciding domestic constitutional cases “as an issue of interpretive theory” has obscured
   the extent to which the Justices have employed “a whole range of ‘diplomatic’
   justifications” for their behavior); Law & Chang, supra note 11, at 570 (likening the
   TCC’s extensive use of foreign jurisprudence to “a form of judicial diplomacy” that
   can counteract Taiwan’s severe diplomatic isolation by “generat[ing] badly needed
   support and acceptance among the international community”); Law & Versteeg, supra
   note 6, at 1181 (arguing that the adoption of constitutional ideas from other countries
   can be an attractive strategy for “marginal states” to “court[] foreign approval and
   enhance[] their legitimacy”).
64                                        《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



     Parts II, III, IV, and V explore the inner workings of the JSC, KCC,
TCC, and HKCFA respectively. Each case study highlights a number of
variables that cannot be captured by reading the court’s decisions, such
as the gap between foreign law usage and foreign law citation and the
institutional mechanisms for conducting foreign legal research. The
relevant institutional characteristics of the four courts, as well as the U.S.
Supreme Court, are summarized in Table 1. Across all of the cases, a
court’s institutional capacity for comparativism is highly correlated with
the degree to which it actually uses foreign law. The KCC, TCC, and
HKCFA are better equipped to perform foreign legal research than the
JSC, which in turn enjoys decisive advantages over the U.S. Supreme
Court. It is no coincidence that the JSC’s level of foreign law usage falls
between that of the TCC, KCC, and HKCFA, at the high end of the
spectrum, and the U.S. Supreme Court, at the low end.

     Part VI canvasses a variety of legal and political explanations for
comparativism, such as a shortage of domestic jurisprudence or a court’s
need for credibility in the eyes of domestic audiences. Although there is
truth to many of these explanations, they do not tell the whole story.
Drawing upon the wealth of information provided by the case studies,
Part VII highlights the fact that courts sometimes engage in
comparativism for reasons that have less to do with adjudication than
diplomacy. In East Asia alone, comparativism serves goals that range
from cultivating international influence and prestige, to promoting the
rule of law in other countries, to reassuring foreign investors, to
supporting treaty-based sovereignty arrangements. Although the U.S.
Supreme Court rarely practices constitutional comparativism, it is an
active practitioner of judicial diplomacy in other forms. Courts employ
strategies as varied as their goals.
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s               65
                Approach to Comparativism

     Part VIII makes the basic but widely overlooked point that
comparativism is shaped as much by the ability of judges to use foreign
law as by their desire to do so. Courts and judges operate within
institutional and resource constraints that define the outer limits of their
capabilities. These constraints include the range of institutional
mechanisms within a court for learning about foreign law, and the extent
to which legal education generates an adequate supply of lawyers and
judges with both the ability and the desire to consult foreign law.

     The Article concludes by identifying various reasons for which
judicial diplomacy is likely to become increasingly prevalent, and by
assessing how ambitious courts are likely to fare in their pursuit of
global influence and prestige. Notwithstanding the globalization of
constitutional law, it remains difficult for constitutional courts to be fully
global in either influence or intellectual reach. Instead, courts belong to
jurisprudential networks or legal families, and they tend to exhibit little
interest in, or influence over, courts that fall outside their own groups.



I. THE CHALLENGES OF MEASURING COMPARATIVISM:
   METHODOLOGY AND DATA COLLECTION

     Comparativism can be defined and measured in more ways than
one. In order to understand what we are attempting to explain and how it
can be measured, we must draw two distinctions. The first is the
distinction between foreign law and international law. Some scholars
group foreign law usage together with international law usage under the
66                                                 《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯


                                                     46
umbrella category of “transnational law.”                 However, foreign law usage
and international law usage do not occur for exactly the same reasons. In
particular, judicial usage of international law often enjoys a stronger
                                                                47
legal basis than judicial usage of foreign law.                      Therefore, the two
phenomena cannot be treated as fungible for purposes of explanation.
This Article concerns itself with judicial usage of foreign law as opposed
to international law.

       The second crucial distinction is between judicial citation of foreign
law and judicial usage of foreign law. Citation of foreign law is a narrow
phenomenon that can be measured simply by reading judicial opinions.
Usage of foreign law is a broader phenomenon that can be much harder



46 E.g., Black et al., supra note 24.
47 The most obvious difference is that countries often consider themselves bound by
     international law, whereas they are by definition not bound by foreign law. See
     HIRSCHL, supra note 11, at 75 (noting that, “[u]nlike the legally binding and
     warranted application of other bodies of law,” the practice of referring to “foreign
     law” is “purely voluntary”); JACKSON, supra note 19, at 169 (noting that “much
     international law is binding, or potentially binding, on all nations” whereas
     “comparative foreign law is not”); David S. Law, Constitutional Convergence and
     Comparative Competency: A Reply to Professors Jackson and Krotoszynski, 66 ALA.
     L. REV. 145, 146-47 (2014) (noting that it is normatively plausible for courts to pursue
     convergence with international law, but not convergence with foreign law). It is also
     the case that constitutions often contain provisions expressly authorizing or even
     obligating courts to take heed of international law. See Tom Ginsburg et al.,
     Commitment and Diffusion: How and Why National Constitutions Incorporate
     International Law, 2008 U. ILL. L. REV. 201, 207-10 (listing the number and
     percentage of constitutions written after 1945 that explicitly reference or incorporate
     treaties or customary international law). By contrast, constitutions are much less likely
     to explicitly endorse judicial usage of foreign law. Apart from the constitutions of
     South Africa or Zimbabwe, it is unclear whether any national constitutions do so, and
     even the South African constitution gives foreign law less favorable treatment than
     international law. See S. AFR. CONST., 1996, ch. 2, § 39 (“When interpreting the Bill
     of Rights, a court… (b) must consider international law; and (c) may consider foreign
     law.”); ZIM. CONST., 2013, § 46 (“When interpreting this Chapter, a court… may
     consider relevant foreign law…”).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                          67
                Approach to Comparativism

to observe. Perhaps because citation is so easily observed and quantified,
it is tempting to conflate citation and usage, or to treat citation as a
                                     48
convenient proxy for usage.               However, the two are not the same, and
neither is a satisfactory proxy for the other, for several reasons.

      First, courts frequently fail to cite their sources. Numerous courts
make a habit of researching and weighing foreign law yet rarely, if ever,
                                                                                         49
divulge their research by citing it explicitly in their published opinions.
The copious citation practices followed by courts in common law
jurisdictions such as Canada, South Africa, and the United States may
                                                 50
reliably indicate the use of foreign law,             but such practices are far from


48 See, e.g., Black et al., supra note 24 (referring interchangeably to the “using” and
   “citing” of transnational law).
49 See, e.g., BOBEK, supra note 11, at 97, 174 (noting that judges in France and Slovakia
   frequently consider foreign law but consider it improper to cite foreign law in their
   decisions); MARKESINIS & FEDTKE, supra note 11, at 62-65 (discussing France and Italy,
   and noting that, although French judicial opinions as a rule do not cite foreign law, the
   avocats généreaux who advise the Cour de Cassation “are nowadays expected to
   consult foreign law when preparing their recommendations”); LÁSZLÓ SÓLYOM &
   GEORG BRUNNER, CONSTITUTIONAL JUDICIARY IN A NEW DEMOCRACY: THE
   HUNGARIAN CONSTITUTIONAL COURT 4-5 (2000) (revealing that the Hungarian
   Constitutional Court is influenced by the jurisprudence of several countries, especially
   Germany, but explicitly cites only the European Court of Human Rights); Gelter &
   Siems, supra note 11, at 234, 240 (noting that variations in “citation style” may explain
   why the supreme courts of France, Italy, and Spain cite foreign decisions less frequently
   than other supreme courts in Europe, and that study of citations alone “cannot capture
   when judges do not disclose the origin of their inspiration coming from foreign cases or
   contacts with their peers abroad,” or when courts issue documents other than decisions
   that reflect their knowledge of foreign law); Gábor Halmai, The Use of Foreign Law in
   Constitutional Interpretation (dividing “constitutional jurisdictions” into three
   categories: those which do not use foreign law,” such as the U.S. Supreme Court; “those
   which do use foreign law but do not do so explicitly,” such as Hungary; and “those
   which do so explicitly,” such as South Africa), in THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF
   COMPARATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL LAW, supra note 44, at 1328, 1329; Law & Chang,
   supra note 11, at 557 (discussing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s decision not to
   cite foreign law).
50 See Bastarache, supra note 18, at 200 (reporting that “attribution is systematic and
68                                                 《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯


            51
universal.       The opinion-writing conventions of civil law courts, for
example, may disfavor the explicit citation of any case law, much less
                      52
foreign case law.          As a result, judicial citation of foreign law may be


   considered mandatory” whenever the Canadian Supreme Court draws upon foreign
   jurisprudence); Law & Chang, supra note 11, at 523, 533 & nn. 33-35 (discussing,
   and rejecting, the possibility that the Canadian Supreme Court “looks habitually to the
   South African Constitutional Court for guidance and inspiration” but simply fails to
   acknowledge when it has done so).
51 See, e.g., BOBEK, supra note 11, at 84 (describing the style of English judicial
   decisions as “open and discursive” and “not hiding anything,” “[i]n contrast to the
   judicial reasoning styles in a number of Continental jurisdictions”); MITCHEL DE S.-
   O.-L’E. LASSER, JUDICIAL DELIBERATIONS: A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF JUDICIAL
   TRANSPARENCY AND LEGITIMACY 3-5 (2004) (summarizing the manner in which
   common law observers tend to contrast the opinion-writing practices of common law
   and civil law courts); MARKESINIS & FEDTKE, supra note 11, at 62-66 (citing Italy and
   France as examples of countries where courts give considerable attention to, but do
   not cite, foreign law); Bryde, supra note 11, at 297 (noting that “the German
   Constitutional Court has developed a style of reasoning where it basically cites only
   its own precedents”); Saunders, supra note 11, at 580 (observing that “features of the
   process of adjudication... associated with common law and civil law legal systems”
   may help to “explain differences in the extent of explicit reference to foreign
   constitutional experience in judicial reasoning”).
52 Citation practices vary within the civil law world, but French and German
   constitutional adjudication share in common their tendency to cite only a narrow
   range of domestic legal sources. The French judicial style is famously restrictive and
   frowns upon citation of anything but codified domestic law. See JOHN BELL,
   JUDICIARIES WITHIN EUROPE: A COMPARATIVE REVIEW 73-74 (2006) (describing the
   “style” of French judgments as “simply giv[ing] a result, which follows from the
   rule,” “but not... provid[ing] the reasons,” in a manner “more like the minutes of a
   committee meeting, which do not attempt to summarise the debates that went on
   before the decision was reached”); BOBEK, supra note 11, at 97-99 (dubbing the
   French judicial style “the example[] of a legal tradition which hides more than it
   explicitly tells,” and noting that legislation is “essentially the only visible authority to
   which a French judicial decision is allowed to refer”); LASSER, supra note 51, at 31-
   35 (observing that the manner in which French Cour de cassation decisions are
   written “effectively denies access to anything but the numerical citation and the
   syllogistic application of the codified law”); id. at 329-30 (discussing how French
   legal theory denies judicial decisions the status of “law”). To some degree, Dutch and
   Italian judicial opinions share similar characteristics. See Gelter & Siems, supra note
   11, at 253 (noting that “some courts may not be able to cite foreign law (or even
   anything else beside the applicable codes and statutes) openly, either due to a legal
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                            69
                Approach to Comparativism

                                                                  53
poorly correlated with judicial usage of foreign law.

      Second, courts can and do use foreign law in ways that have little, if
any, influence on the opinions they issue. Most scholarship on judicial
usage of foreign law focuses on the kind of usage that manifests itself
                                                           54
explicitly or implicitly in judicial decisions.                 There are other ways,
however, in which courts make use of foreign law. For example, courts
have been known to establish research institutes dedicated to comparative
law, publish translations of judicial opinions, issue reports about foreign
law, join international organizations, and host international conferences.
All of these activities constitute judicial usage of foreign law in the sense
that they involve deliberate exposure to, or dissemination of, foreign law.


   prohibition or to a social constraint,” and that “[t]his seems to be the case particularly
   in France and Italy”); Elaine Mak, Why Do Dutch and UK Judges Cite Foreign Law?,
   70 CAMBRIDGE L.J. 420, 430-31 (2011) (observing that the Dutch Supreme Court was
   historically influenced by the French Cour de cassation and tends to render short
   opinions that do not cite foreign law, even if foreign materials were considered).
   By contrast, the German legal tradition—to which the Japanese, Korean, and
   Taiwanese legal systems all trace their roots—is “relatively open” to consideration of
   a wide range of sources. BOBEK, supra note 11, at 120. According to a member of the
   German Constitutional Court (Bundesverfassungsgericht), “[t]here are no
   fundamental objections against referring to international and foreign sources in
   German courts in general or the Constitutional Court in particular,” and the
   Constitutional Court consults the work of other courts “extensively.” Bryde, supra
   note 11, at 296-97. Notwithstanding its willingness to consider foreign law in its
   deliberations, however, the Bundesverfassungsgericht’s style of reasoning generally
   excludes the citation of foreign law. See BOBEK, supra note 11, at 141 (counting only
   three comparative references among all of the court’s published decisions in 2008);
   Bryde, supra note 11, at 297 (observing that the court’s tendency to cite “only its own
   precedents” has resulted in “a huge gap between the sources of the decision cited and
   those actually influencing the judges”).
53 See Law & Chang, supra note 11, at 527 (warning that “the frequency with which a
   court cites foreign law in its opinions is an extremely unreliable measure of the extent
   to which the court actually makes use of foreign law”).
54 See, e.g., JACKSON, supra note 19, at 17-102 (calling upon judges to “engage” with
   foreign law by evaluating whether, and to what extent, foreign law holds valuable
   lessons for domestic jurisprudence).
70                                               《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



It is not always the case, however, that these activities occur primarily or
exclusively for the purpose of enriching judicial deliberations or
adorning judicial opinions with foreign citations. Creation of a research
institute that specializes in foreign law might be intended, for instance,
to enhance a court’s international prestige and influence, or to facilitate
legislative or constitutional reform activities by other government
institutions, or to create a repository of knowledge for the benefit of the
                  55
general public.

      In short, it is difficult to measure judicial usage of foreign law using
quantitative techniques because neither the frequency nor the range of
usage can be reliably observed simply by reading judicial decisions. A
qualitative case study approach that involves in-depth investigation of a
specific court is, in theory, well suited to overcoming this type of
           56
problem.        However, a case study approach suffers from potential
drawbacks of its own. If the cases selected for study are too different in
too many ways, it becomes impossible to attribute similarities or



55 The research institute established by the KCC, for instance, publishes reports on
   foreign law but has no responsibility for performing foreign legal research in
   connection to pending cases; such research is handled by an entirely different set of
   foreign law specialists. Thus, whatever purpose the institute actually serves, the
   connection between the creation of the institute and the adjudication of actual cases is
   tangential at best. See infra subsection III.D.6 (discussing the KCC’s creation of a
   Constitutional Research Institute that performs comparative constitutional research
   unrelated to pending cases); see also, e.g., Gelter & Siems, supra note 11, at 240
   (noting that the French Cour de cassation, which rarely cites foreign law explicitly in
   its own decisions, issues an annual report that “regularly considers developments in
   other jurisdictions”).
56 See Law & Chang, supra note 11, at 527 (urging “[s]cholars who wish to understand
   or measure a particular court’s usage of foreign law” to “supplement quantitative
   research methods, such as statistical analysis of citations to foreign law, with
   qualitative approaches that are capable of probing more deeply, such as interviews
   with court personnel”).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                    71
                Approach to Comparativism

                                                          57
differences across cases to any specific variable.             Ideally, one would
compare cases that share many background characteristics in order to
isolate the effect of a smaller number of variables.

     This Article addresses these challenges by employing what social
scientists call a structured-focused comparison of most-similar and most-
                                                                             58
different cases, which seeks to combine the best of both worlds.                  On
the one hand, a case study approach permits the kind of probing
investigation that is necessary to unearth accurate information about
usage, as opposed to citation, of foreign law. Extended discussion with
court personnel who possess first-hand knowledge is a particularly rich
source of such information. On the other hand, the disadvantages of the
case study approach can be mitigated through a combination of case
selection and data collection strategies. Section I.A sets forth the logic
behind the selection of most-similar and most-different cases, while
Section I.B elaborates upon the structured-focused approach to data
collection.

     A. Case Selection: Most-Similar Versus Most-Different Cases
     The reliability of the case study approach is inherently improved by
collecting data on multiple countries rather than a single country, but the


57 See GARY KING, ROBERT O. KEOHANE & SIDNEY VERBA, DESIGNING SOCIAL INQUIRY:
   SCIENTIFIC INFERENCE IN QUALITATIVE RESEARCH 104 (1994); Lee Epstein & Gary
   King, The Rules of Inference, 69 U. CHI. L. REV. 1, 58-59 (2002); Ran Hirschl, The
   Question of Case Selection in Comparative Constitutional Law, 53 AM. J. COMP. L.
   125, 135 (2005).
58 See A EUROPE OF RIGHTS: THE IMPACT OF THE ECHR ON NATIONAL LEGAL SYSTEMS
   18 (Helen Keller & Alec Stone Sweet eds., 2008) (explaining the methodological
   merits of “structured-focused comparison,” and offering a fruitful example of its
   application to the study of courts); ALEXANDER L. GEORGE & ANDREW BENNETT,
   CASE STUDIES AND THEORY DEVELOPMENT IN THE SOCIAL SCIENCES 67-72 (2005)
   (explaining the origins and merits of “structured, focused comparison”).
72                                                《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



selection of Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan in particular has the further
methodological advantages associated with comparing “most similar
          59
cases.”        Selection of cases that share much in common makes it
possible to isolate the effect of the differences that remain. Not only are
all three countries geographically adjacent, but they also belong to the
same legal and geopolitical groupings. All three are democracies with
German-influenced civil law systems and similar ways of training and
promoting judges. South Korea and Taiwan share the added similarities
of being former Japanese colonies that received German law through a
Japanese filter and subsequently experienced democratization and a
renaissance of judicial review at roughly the same time in the late 1980s.
Furthermore, all three countries are closely aligned with the United
States in security and economic matters. Finally, none of the three
countries possesses a constitutional provision that either endorses or
                                                                          60
limits judicial consideration of foreign or international law.

      These similarities make it possible to rule out a number of
explanations for variation among the three countries. A finding that one
of the three courts makes greater use of foreign law than the others, for
example, cannot be attributed to the existence of a career judiciary, the


59 Hirschl, supra note 57, at 133-35 (observing that the selection of “most similar cases”
   is a “standard case selection principle[] in inference-oriented, controlled comparison
   in qualitative, ‘small-N’ studies” that “control[s] for variables or potential
   explanations that are not central to the study” and thus helps isolate the effect of the
   key variables of interest).
60 See supra note 47 (noting provisions in the constitutions of South Africa and
   Zimbabwe that explicitly authorize judicial usage of foreign law). As an empirical
   matter, it is far from clear whether the existence of such provisions actually affects the
   degree to which courts use foreign law. See Kalb, supra note 11, at 425 (observing
   that the degree of judicial “engagement with foreign and international law does not
   seem to vary measurably” as between countries that possess or lack constitutional
   provisions addressing the use of foreign law).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                       73
                Approach to Comparativism

historical influence of German law, or close relations with the United
States because those characteristics are common to all three countries.
Likewise, because none of the three countries possess constitutional
provisions that address judicial usage of foreign law, there is no
possibility that the presence or absence of such provisions accounts for
differences among the three countries.

     The fourth case study, Hong Kong, is included for precisely the
opposite reasons. An invaluable complement to the study of most similar
                                                      61
cases is the study of most different cases.                A combination of most
similar and most different cases can rule out competing explanations in
ways that an analysis of most similar cases alone cannot. Suppose, for
example, that three highly similar courts both engage heavily in
comparativism, but it is unclear which (if any) of their many shared
characteristics explains their behavior. If a fourth court that shares only
one of those characteristics behaves the same way, that characteristic
                                                     62
becomes more plausible as an explanation.                  Alternatively, if a fourth
court shares none of those characteristics in common yet still behaves
the same way, then the explanation must be sought elsewhere.

     Within East Asia, Hong Kong fills the role of a most different case.
As a wealthy, industrialized society, it shares enough in common with
the other three jurisdictions that comparisons can plausibly be made. The
inclusion of Hong Kong in the analysis also rounds out the list of
jurisdictions with judicial review in East Asia and yields a relatively


61 See Hirschl, supra note 57, at 139-42 (explaining the logic of the “most different
   cases” approach).
62 See id. at 139-41 (observing that analysis of “most different” cases can isolate and
   emphasize the explanatory power of the few “key independent variables” that the cases
   share in common).
74                                              《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯


                                                          63
comprehensive picture of the region as a whole.                In numerous respects,
however, Hong Kong is unlike the other three cases. It belongs to
different legal and geopolitical families: whereas Japan, Korea, and
Taiwan all possess a German legal tradition and rely upon the United
States for their security, Hong Kong has a strongly British legal tradition
and forms part of China. Unlike the others, Hong Kong is not a
sovereign state but instead a “Special Administrative Region” of China
                                         64
that enjoys heightened autonomy.              One aspect of this autonomy is that
Hong Kong’s courts are not answerable or inferior to any court in
                    65
mainland China.          Hong Kong is therefore unusual within East Asia,
and indeed globally, in combining vigorous judicial review by
                                                                    66
independent courts with a lack of democratic self-rule                   and oversight


63 The only East Asian country with judicial review that this Article does not cover is
   Mongolia. See TOM GINSBURG, JUDICIAL REVIEW IN NEW DEMOCRACIES:
   CONSTITUTIONAL COURTS IN ASIAN CASES 164-200 (2003) (describing the often
   vigorous practice of judicial review in Mongolia).
64 See XIANGGANG JIBEN FA, art. 2 (H.K.) (authorizing the HKSAR to “exercise a high
   degree of autonomy and enjoy executive, legislative and independent judicial power”);
   Danny Gittings, Hong Kong’s Courts Are Learning to Live with China, 19 H.K. J., July
   2010, at 1, 1, available at http://hub.hku.hk/bitstream/10722/193248/1/Content.pdf
   (describing the 1984 agreement, the Sino–British Joint Declaration, “under which
   Britain agreed to restore Hong Kong to China in 1997, in return for generous
   promises about the high degree of autonomy Hong Kong would enjoy under a ‘one
   country, two systems’ formula”).
65 See Gittings, supra note 64, at 1 (describing the HKCFA’s existence and power of
   final adjudication as “a key part of the deal struck between London and Beijing in
   1984” that was subsequently enshrined in the Sino–British Joint Declaration).
66 Only half of Hong Kong’s relatively weak legislature, the Legislative Council, is
   directly elected, while the head of the government, the Chief Executive, is selected by
   interest groups or “functional constituencies” that are largely sympathetic to China
   from a list of candidates approved by Beijing. See DANNY GITTINGS, INTRODUCTION
   TO THE HONG KONG BASIC LAW 107-13 (2013) (explaining why the “functional
   constituency” system for selecting Hong Kong’s Chief Executive confers outsized
   influence upon a “small circle” of roughly 200,000 voters and prevents pro-
   democracy candidates from winning); id. at 129-40 (describing how the Standing
   Committee of the National People’s Congress blocked the introduction of universal
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                        75
                Approach to Comparativism

                                                         67
by an authoritarian central government.                       Finally, unlike the
constitutions of Japan, Korea, and Taiwan, Hong Kong’s constitution
contains several provisions that explicitly authorize or contemplate
                                                        68
judicial usage of foreign and international law.

     B. Data Collection: A Structured-Focused Approach
      This case selection strategy of combining most-similar and most-
different cases is paired with a “structured-focused” approach to data
collection, meaning that the investigation of each case is structured
                                           69
around the same set of questions.               For each of the four courts, the
following questions are addressed sequentially: (1) the level of each
court’s foreign law usage, (2) the level of each court’s foreign law
expertise, (3) the jurisdictions most frequently considered by each court,
(4) the mechanisms that each court possesses for learning about foreign


   suffrage for Legislative Council elections, and observing that the “functional
   constituency” system empowers “economically important but numerically small”
   groups).
67 See STANDING COMM. NAT’L PEOPLE’S CONG., DECISION OF THE STANDING
   COMMITTEE OF THE NATIONAL PEOPLE’S CONGRESS ON ISSUES RELATING TO THE
   SELECTION OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OF THE HONG KONG SPECIAL ADMINISTRATIVE
   REGION BY UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE AND ON THE METHOD FOR FORMING THE
   LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL OF THE HONG KONG SPECIAL ADMINISTRATIVE REGION IN THE
   YEAR 2016, at 3-4 (Aug. 31, 2014), available at http://www.2017.gov.hk/filemanager/
   template/en/doc/20140831a.pdf (requiring the screening of candidates for Chief
   Executive of Hong Kong by a “nominating committee” dominated by interest groups
   sympathetic to Beijing on the grounds that “the Chief Executive has to be a person
   who loves the country [China] and loves Hong Kong”); Tony Cheung et al., Beijing
   Emphasises Its Total Control over HK, S. CHINA MORNING POST (H.K.), June 10,
   2014, at A1 (describing the position formally taken by China’s State Council that Hong
   Kong’s “high degree of autonomy” is itself “subject to the central government’s
   authorisation,” and that it remains the central government’s prerogative to oversee
   Hong Kong’s government).
68 See infra notes 251-254 and accompanying text.
69 A EUROPE OF RIGHTS, supra note 58, at 18; see also GEORGE & BENNETT, supra note
   58, at 67-72.
76                                      《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



law, and (5) the extent of each court’s interaction with foreign courts.
The table at the end of this Article provides further structure and focus
for the data by summarizing and contrasting the relevant institutional
characteristics of the four East Asian courts plus the U.S. Supreme Court.
Use of a structured-focused approach ensures that similar data is
collected on each court and facilitates inferences about the effect of a
consistent set of variables. This approach also yields benefits for the
overall study of courts and comparativism: it promotes the development
of a cumulative body of scholarship by furnishing a template for data
collection on additional countries and courts.

     The data for the case studies were collected as follows. In Japan,
interviews were conducted in 2008, 2009, and 2013 with a variety of
judges, officials, and scholars, including eight sitting and retired
members of the JSC itself; two judges assigned to the JSC as research
judges or chōsakan, who perform the functions of law clerks; and judges
sent abroad to study foreign law at government expense. Likewise, the
original data in this article on the KCC derive from interviews conducted
by the author in 2011, 2013, and 2014 with a combination of judges,
officials, and scholars, including a retired member of the KCC; three
senior officials responsible for relations with foreign courts and
oversight of legal research; three Constitutional Research Officers (the
Korean equivalent of law clerks); a researcher at the newly established
Constitutional Research Institute, a subsidiary of the KCC; several
judges sent abroad by the Korean judiciary to study foreign law; a
prosecutor; and several scholars with prior judicial experience. The bulk
of the fieldwork in Taiwan consisted of confidential, face-to-face
interviews conducted in 2011 and 2014 with thirteen current and former
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                     77
                Approach to Comparativism

                                                                        70
justices of the TCC and ten current and former law clerks.                   In Hong
Kong, interviews were conducted in 2014 with three members of the
HKCFA, two law clerks at the HKCFA, two former lower-court judges,
and a variety of local scholars and attorneys.



II. THE JAPANESE SUPREME COURT

     A. Level of Foreign Law Citation
     The JSC rarely cites foreign law in its decisions. A recent empirical
analysis suggests that actual citations to foreign precedent appear in
                                                         71
roughly 5% of the JSC’s constitutional decisions.             The rarity of explicit
citations to foreign precedent reflects in part the fact that, compared to a
common law court such as the U.S. Supreme Court, the JSC writes
relatively concise, lightly footnoted opinions in a style more
                                             72
characteristic of many civil law courts.

     B. Level of Foreign Law Usage
     Like the KCC and TCC, the JSC is significantly more likely to


70 The interviews in Taiwan were conducted by the author, on some occasions in
   conjunction with Professor Wen-Chen Chang and once with the participation of
   Professor Carol Lin, in a combination of Mandarin and English tailored to the
   interviewees. Professor Chang was a law clerk to former Chief Justice Weng Yueh-
   Sheng of the TCC but is not included in the count of interviewees.
71 See Akiko Ejima, A Gap Between the Apparent and Hidden Attitudes of the Supreme
   Court of Japan Towards Foreign Precedents (identifying 11 cases in which foreign
   law was cited, out of a total of 234 constitutional cases decided from 1990 through
   mid-2008), in THE USE OF FOREIGN PRECEDENTS BY CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES, supra
   note 11, at 273, 277.
72 See supra notes 51-52 and accompanying text (contrasting the opinion-writing and
   citation practices of civil law and common law courts).
78                                            《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



perform foreign law research than to cite foreign law in its opinions.
Unlike the KCC or TCC, however, the JSC has neither routinized nor
institutionalized the practice of researching foreign law. The overall
attitude at the JSC toward such research is perhaps best described as one
of indifference, rather than either enthusiasm or hostility.

     On the one hand, consideration of foreign law is distinctly
uncontroversial. None of the justices I interviewed could think of any
case in which a judge or justice had resisted or criticized the
consideration of foreign approaches to a particular legal question. This
lack of resistance to comparative legal analysis was attributed to the fact
that Japanese law is itself of largely foreign origins. Those foreign
origins are primarily German, but American influence is also obvious in
                                     73
the area of constitutional law.           In the words of one justice, there is
“nothing to prevent” the JSC from engaging more heavily in
                         74
comparative analysis.

     On the other hand, neither the justices nor the clerks perform
foreign legal research as a matter of course. Several justices echoed the
sentiment that foreign legal research is “neither encouraged nor
                                                                                    75
discouraged” but is instead conducted when “necessary for the case,”
                                                       76
and in most cases, it is “not so necessary.”                By their own account,


73 See David S. Law, The Myth of the Imposed Constitution (discussing American
   involvement in the drafting of Japan’s post-war constitution and the consequent
   characterization of the Japanese constitution as “imposed”), in SOCIAL AND POLITICAL
   FOUNDATIONS OF CONSTITUTIONS 239, 242-44 (Denis J. Galligan & Mila Versteeg
   eds., 2013).
74 Interview with Justice F, Current or Former Member of the Supreme Court of Japan,
   in Tokyo, Japan ( July 17, 2013).
75 Interview with Justice H, Current or Former Member of the Supreme Court of Japan,
   in Tokyo, Japan ( July 17, 2013).
76 Interview with Justice A, Current or Former Member of the Supreme Court of Japan,
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                           79
                Approach to Comparativism

Japanese judges are, for the most part, “not so interested” in foreign law.
The fact that lawyers tend not to employ foreign law in their briefs and
arguments to the JSC also contributes to the JSC’s “limited motivation”
                                 77
to learn about foreign law.            One justice characterized the JSC’s use of
                                                                         78
foreign law as “far behind compared to global standards.”

      When foreign legal research does occur, it may occur either upon
                                    79
the initiative of a law clerk            or at the request of a particular justice.
Whether foreign law research is considered “necessary” varies with both
the area of law and the specific topic under consideration. My sources
estimated that foreign legal research is conducted in less than 10% of
cases; according to one justice, the total is perhaps “less than 1%” of all
                                                                    80
cases heard, amounting to “a few occasions per year.”                    However, these
                                                                                         81
estimates reflect usage of foreign law across the JSC’s entire docket.
Unlike either the TCC or KCC, the JSC is a court of general jurisdiction,
                                                                                         82
and only a small fraction of its docket consists of constitutional cases.



   in Tokyo, Japan ( July 17, 2013).
77 Interview with Justice F, supra note 74.
78 Id.
79 See David S. Law, The Anatomy of a Conservative Court: Judicial Review in Japan,
   87 TEX. L. REV. 1545, 1579 (2009) (describing how successful career judges are
   recruited by the judicial bureaucracy to serve as law clerks, or chōsakan, on the JSC
   for several years).
80 Interview with Justice H, supra note 75.
81 For most purposes, the JSC divides its docket into civil, criminal, and administrative
   cases and does not track constitutional cases as a distinct category. See infra note 85
   (citing official court statistics that employ these three categories). However, one judge
   who worked at the JSC as a chōsakan for nearly five years indicated that he
   encountered fewer than twenty-five cases in total that involved a constitutional
   question.
82 Professor Ejima’s analysis of the 15,885 JSC decisions rendered from 1990 through
   mid-2008 and included in the TKC database found only 234 cases (or 1.5% of the
   total) that contained any mention of the Japanese Constitution. See Ejima, supra note
   71, at 275, 277.
80                                                《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



Several justices agreed that the JSC is more likely to consider foreign
                                                                   83
law in constitutional cases than in other areas of law,                 but as one justice
observed, the court is typically confronted with a “lack of important
constitutional litigation,” which may help to explain its overall lack of
                       84
foreign law usage.

      Not only the composition, but also the sheer size of the JSC’s
docket may have consequences for its usage of foreign law. As Japan’s
highest court of general jurisdiction, the JSC faces a massive docket of
                                      85
over 12,000 cases annually,                most of which it lacks discretion to
       86
reject.     Even though Japan has only one-third the population of the
United States, the JSC’s docket is even greater than that of the U.S.



83 See Interview with Justice H, supra note 75; Interview with Justice F, supra note 74.
   Other areas of more frequent foreign law usage reportedly include intellectual
   property cases and, increasingly, corporate law cases. See id.
84 Interview with Justice F, supra note 74.
85 In 2012, the most recent year for which the JSC has released statistics as of this
   writing, the JSC received 12,311 new cases (8169 civil and administrative cases and
   4142 criminal cases) and decided 12,594 existing cases (8336 civil and administrative
   cases and 4258 criminal cases). See SUPREME COURT OF JAPAN, CIVIL AND
   ADMINISTRATIVE CASES: NEWLY FILED, RESOLVED, AND PENDING, available at
   http://www.courts.go.jp/sihotokei/nenpo/pdf/B24DMIN1-1.pdf            (reporting       the
   numbers of civil and administrative cases filed and decided in 2012); SUPREME
   COURT OF JAPAN, CRIMINAL AND OTHER CASES: NEWLY FILED, RESOLVED, AND
   PENDING, available at http://www.courts.go.jp/sihotokei/nenpo/pdf/B24DKEI01.pdf
   (reporting the numbers of criminal cases filed and decided in 2012).
86 See HIROSHI ITOH, THE SUPREME COURT AND BENIGN ELITE DEMOCRACY IN JAPAN 47
   (2010) (noting that 1996 revisions of the Japanese civil code that were intended to
   increase the JSC’s discretion over its civil docket have failed to significantly alleviate
   the JSC’s workload); John O. Haley, The Japanese Judiciary: Maintaining Integrity,
   Autonomy, and the Public Trust (noting that, “[u]nlike the United States Supreme
   Court and most state supreme courts in the United States,” the JSC “does not exercise
   any significant discretion over its docket”), in LAW IN JAPAN: A TURNING POINT 99,
   105 (Daniel H. Foote ed., 2007); Law, supra note 79, at 1577-78 (detailing the JSC’s
   “overwhelming” docket, which rivals that of the U.S. Supreme Court in absolute size
   but consists largely of cases that the JSC cannot decline to hear).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                       81
                Approach to Comparativism

                  87
Supreme Court          (which, unlike the JSC, can and does dismiss the vast
majority of its cases at will) and far greater than that of either the KCC
                                                 88           89
or the TCC (which receive roughly 1500                and 500      petitions per year,
respectively). All other things being equal, the more cases that a court
must hear, the less time that it can spend per case, and the less likely that
it can afford to perform foreign legal research. Nevertheless, docket
pressure alone cannot explain the JSC’s modest use of foreign law. Both
the Israeli Supreme Court and the Indian Supreme Court, for example,
                                90
face daunting caseloads,             yet both are known for engaging in
                          91
comparative analysis.


87 See The Justices’ Caseload, SUP. CT. U.S., http://www.supremecourt.gov/about/
   justicecaseload.aspx (last visited Feb. 28, 2015) [http://perma.cc/3WFE-2CDW].
88 In 2013, the KCC received 1480 new cases and disposed of 1585 existing cases. See
   Case Statistics of the Constitutional Court of Korea, CONST. CT. KOREA,
   http://english.ccourt.go.kr/cckhome/eng/decisions/caseLoadStatic/caseLoadStatic.do
   (last visited Feb. 28, 2015) [http://perma.cc/UH4T-SJTK] (reporting the cumulative
   number of cases filed and decided through the present); see also CONSTITUTIONAL
   COURT OF KOREA, TWENTY YEARS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL COURT OF KOREA 121
   (2008) (reporting an annual average of 1214 filings from September 1988 through
   August 2007). A backlog of cases means that it is possible for the KCC to decide
   more cases in a given year than it receives.
89 Justices of the Constitutional Court: Cases Commenced, Terminated, and Pending,
   DEP’T STAT. JUD. YUAN, http://www.judicial.gov.tw/juds/report/eg-1.htm (last visited
   Feb. 28. 2015) [http://perma.cc/SQBV-UKCU].
90 See Suzie Navot, Israel: Creating a Constitution — The Use of Foreign Precedents by
   the Supreme Court (1994–2010) (noting that the Israeli Supreme Court “is the first,
   last, and only” court in Israel with jurisdiction over most disputes concerning
   “government institutions and state organs” or “between citizens and the State”), in
   THE USE OF FOREIGN PRECEDENTS BY CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES, supra note 11, at 129,
   136; Nick Robinson, A Quantitative Analysis of the Indian Supreme Court’s Workload,
   10 J. EMPIRICAL LEGAL STUD. 570, 578-79 (2013) (reporting that the Indian Supreme
   Court currently receives roughly 70,000 filings per year).
91 See Navot, supra note 90, at 135 (noting that over 20% of the Israeli Supreme Court’s
   citations over the period from 1948 to 1994 were to foreign law); id. at 141-42
   (reporting that over the period from 1994 to 2010, roughly one in three of the Israeli
   Supreme Court’s constitutional decisions cited foreign law); Adam M. Smith, Making
   Itself at Home: Understanding Foreign Law in Domestic Jurisprudence: The Indian
82                                               《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



      Consideration of foreign law becomes more likely if another court
is known for its extensive jurisprudence on a topic with which the JSC
itself has relatively little experience. The leading example is electoral
malapportionment. In 1976, the JSC declared unconstitutional an
electoral apportionment scheme for the legislative lower house that
                                                                             92
weighted rural voters five times as heavily as urban voters.                      To date,
the 1976 malapportionment decision is one of only nine cases in which
the JSC has ever held a law unconstitutional, and it remains the most
momentous decision rendered by the court since its establishment in
       93
1947.       At the time of the decision, the JSC knew that the U.S. Supreme
Court had already compiled a significant body of jurisprudence on the
issue of electoral malapportionment, but the manner in which the JSC



   Case, 24 BERKELEY J. INT’L L. 218, 239-40 (2006) (finding that the Indian Supreme
   Court referred to foreign law in roughly one-quarter of its decisions between 1950 and
   2005); Alexander Somek, The Deadweight of Formulae: What Might Have Been the
   Second Germanization of American Equal Protection Review, 1 U. PA. J. CONST. L.
   284, 284 n.1 (1998) (characterizing the Israeli Supreme Court as “the most important
   comparative constitutional law institute of the world,” and giving credit to the court’s
   “practice of employing clerks from all over the world, who do the research work on
   their country of origin”).
92 See Law, supra note 79, at 1547-48 (discussing Kurokawa v. Chiba Prefecture
   Election Control Commission, Saikō Saibansho [Sup. Ct.] Apr. 14, 1976, 30 SAIKŌ
   SAIBANSHO MINJI HANREISHŪ [MINSHŪ] 223 ( Japan)).
93 See id. (counting eight cases as of 2009 in which the JSC had struck down a law as
   unconstitutional). In late 2013, the JSC held a law unconstitutional for only the ninth
   time since its establishment in 1947. See Tomohiro Osaki & Reiji Yoshida, Top Court
   Shoots Down Unequal Inheritance Rights, JAPAN TIMES (Sept. 4, 2013),
   www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2013/09/04/national/top-court-shoots-down-unequal-inh
   eritance-rights [http://perma.cc/KK7Q-DKB5] (describing the JSC’s decision to
   overrule several earlier decisions and hold unconstitutional a provision of the Civil
   Code that limits illegitimate children to one-half the inheritance of legitimate
   children). Prior to the 2013 case, the last time the JSC struck down a law was in 2008,
   in a case that also involved explicit formal discrimination against illegitimate children.
   That case involved eligibility for citizenship as opposed to inheritance. See Law,
   supra note 79, at 1547.
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                       83
                Approach to Comparativism

became aware of the relevant American case law stands as a lesson in
the importance of in-house foreign legal expertise. In 1976, the chief
chōsakan at the JSC, Jiro Nakamura, was a common law expert and was
familiar in particular with the U.S. Supreme Court’s landmark decisions
                     94                            95
in Baker v. Carr          and Reynolds v. Sims.         Nakamura was reportedly
                                                                              96
responsible for introducing both cases to the members of the JSC.

     C. Jurisdictions Considered
     To the extent that the JSC considers foreign case law, it is most
likely to evaluate the jurisprudence of the U.S. Supreme Court, the
German Bundesverfassungsgericht, and in recent years the European
                                        97
Court of Human Rights (ECtHR).               Interest in German jurisprudence is
a natural consequence of the extent to which Japanese law is modeled on
German law, while the extensive role played by the American
occupation in the drafting of Japan’s post-war constitution makes
American constitutional jurisprudence of particular interest in Japan.
Notably absent from the list are two courts from the English-speaking
world, the Canadian Supreme Court and South African Constitutional
Court, both of which enjoy a reputation in the English-language
comparative constitutional literature for exporting their constitutional
                98
jurisprudence.


94 Baker v. Carr, 369 U.S. 186 (1962).
95 Reynolds v. Sims, 377 U.S. 533 (1964).
96 See Interview with Justice F, supra note 74.
97 See, e.g., id.; Interview with Justice H, supra note 75.
98 See, e.g., SLAUGHTER, supra note 12, at 74 (singling out the South African
   Constitutional Court and the “Canadian Constitutional Court” [sic] as
   “disproportionately influential” and “highly influential, apparently more so than the
   U.S. Supreme Court and other older and more established constitutional courts”);
   Melissa A. Waters, Mediating Norms and Identity: The Role of Transnational Judicial
   Dialogue in Creating and Enforcing International Law, 93 GEO. L.J. 487, 558 n. 316
84                                             《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



     Although the justices themselves are generally not avid consumers
of legal scholarship, one justice explicitly credited the expansion of
comparative constitutional scholarship in Japan for increasing both the
degree to which the JSC performs foreign legal research and the range of
                                          99
jurisdictions that the JSC considers.          Scholarly translation and analysis
of foreign law is facilitating the citation of foreign law by lawyers,
which in turn makes it more likely that the chōsakan and the justices will
consider it “necessary” to conduct their own research into foreign law.

     D. Level of Foreign Law Expertise
     The Japanese judiciary has a longstanding practice of sending
promising recruits abroad to study foreign law. Even so, however, the
justices and clerks of the JSC tend on average to possess less foreign
legal expertise than their Korean or Taiwanese counterparts, as
summarized below in Table 1.

     The beginnings of this practice were modest. In the early 1960s,
Japan sent one judge per year to the United States to earn an LL.M. with
the support of the Fulbright Foundation, and Germany was subsequently
added as a destination with a combination of private and public



   (2005) (identifying the Canadian Supreme Court as “one of the most influential
   domestic courts worldwide on human rights issues”); Adam Liptak, U.S. Court, a
   Longtime Beacon, Is Now Guiding Fewer Nations, N.Y. TIMES, Sept. 18, 2008, at A1
   (noting that many legal scholars have “singled out” the Canadian Supreme Court and
   South African Constitutional Court as “increasingly influential”).
99 See Interview with Justice F, supra note 74; cf. Giorgio Fabio Colombo, Japan as a
   Victim of Comparative Law, 22 MICH. ST. INT’L L. REV. 731, 747 (2014) (observing
   that “almost every Japanese law professor reads (and very often speaks fluently) at
   least one, but often more than one foreign language among German, English and
   French, and has a deep knowledge of a foreign jurisdiction,” and arguing that
   “Japanese legal scholars are probably the best comparative lawyers in the world”).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                            85
                Approach to Comparativism

           100
funding.         The scope of the study-abroad program has grown
substantially over time. In any given year, the judiciary will recruit
                                                                                101
roughly 100 to 120 judges from the judicial training institute.                       From
this number, approximately thirty will be selected by the judicial
                                                                   102
bureaucracy early in their careers to study abroad.                      At least half of
that group goes to the United States, while the remainder is typically
distributed among the United Kingdom, Canada, Germany, France, and
perhaps also Australia.

      At present, the majority of Japanese judges who study abroad do so
                                                                                         103
as visiting scholars or court observers rather than degree candidates.
Of the roughly twenty judges studying abroad in the United States in the
2013-2014 academic year, three-quarters took up residence at law
schools as visiting scholars, while the remainder were assigned to courts
                                             104
in various cities as observers.                    The General Secretariat, the
administrative arm of the JSC, maintains a list of approximately fifteen
American law schools that have regularly accepted Japanese judges as
                                                             105
visiting scholars and are approved destinations.                   Although being sent

100 See Interview with Justice A, supra note 76; Interview with Justice F, supra note 74.
101 The Shiho Kensyujo, or Legal Training and Research Institute (LTRI), is a mandatory
    training program operated by the judiciary at government expense for those who
    pass the Japanese bar examination. Judges and prosecutors are recruited directly
    from the LTRI. See Law, supra note 79, at 1552.
102 Judges are selected for study abroad by the Jimusōkyoku or General Secretariat of
    the Supreme Court, the powerful administrative arm of the judiciary that also selects
    judges to serve as chōsakan on the JSC and to work at the General Secretariat itself.
    See id. at 1556-58.
103 See Interview with Judge 7, Japanese District Court Judge, in Location Concealed
    (Sept. 10, 2013) (estimating that roughly twenty of the hundred or so members of his
    judicial cohort studied in the United States as visiting scholars, while only five or six
    did so as LL.M. candidates).
104 See id.
105 See id. In years past, the few judges who went abroad typically did so as LL.M.
    candidates. See Interview with Justice A, supra note 76. Today, a relatively small
86                                            《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



abroad to study is no longer as exceptional as it once was, it is still
considered a sign of professional promise and distinction.

     The practice of sending judges abroad has borne at least some fruit
in the area of constitutional law. Several prominent judges who studied
abroad, such as Jiro Nakamura, Yasuo Tokikuni, and Toshimaro Kojo,
became known for importing ideas from American constitutional
litigation to Japan, as in the case of the 1976 electoral malapportionment
          106
decision.       There have also been instances in which the JSC’s law
clerks — who are themselves elite career judges assigned to the JSC on
                       107
a temporary basis            — have exposed the justices to foreign ideas and
                       108
ways of thinking.

     Nevertheless, the overall impact of the study-abroad program on the
judiciary and the JSC in particular appears to be limited. The General
Secretariat’s objectives in sending judges abroad are to “widen their
views” and expose them to foreign legal systems that have influenced
                 109
Japanese law.          Several justices opined that, in reality, most judges
have little opportunity to retain their foreign language skills after
returning to Japan and become largely indistinguishable from those who
were never sent abroad. In addition, relatively few of the justices
themselves are likely to be alumni of the judiciary’s study-abroad
program. The fifteen seats on the court are allocated among different

    number who undergo a more rigorous selection process that includes a competitive
    examination still have the opportunity to earn an LL.M. at government expense. See
    Interview with Judge 7, supra note 103.
106 See supra text accompanying notes 92-96.
107 See Law, supra note 79, at 1556-57, 1579.
108 See id. at 1583 n. 241 (recounting the story of one justice’s exposure to the
    constitutional theory of John Hart Ely courtesy of a law clerk).
109 Interview with Justice D, Current or Former Member of the Supreme Court of Japan,
    in Tokyo, Japan ( July 19, 2013).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                         87
                Approach to Comparativism

segments of the legal profession on the basis of an informal quota
system, and under current practice, six of the fifteen justices are selected
                                                  110
from the ranks of the career judiciary.                 It is thus unlikely that more
than one or two of those justices at any given time will have personally
taken advantage of the study-abroad program.

     The remaining nine justices may be exposed to foreign law in other
ways. Typically, four of the nine are former attorneys from private
practice, two are former prosecutors, two are former government
                                                              111
bureaucrats, and one is a former law professor.                     The frequent practice
of selecting a former diplomat to occupy one of the two seats allocated
to the bureaucracy has both the goal and the effect of equipping the court
                                                        112
with native expertise in international law.                   It is also not unusual for
one of the former attorneys on the court to have practiced international
business law. The academic on the court is especially likely to have
extensive exposure to foreign law. Law professors in Japan are much
more likely to engage in comparative legal scholarship and to possess
                                                                       113
foreign legal training than their American counterparts,                     and a number
of the professors to have served on the JSC have been renowned for their
expertise in foreign law. Regardless of how they acquire foreign legal
expertise, however, the justices who already possess such expertise are



110 See Law, supra note 79, at 1551, 1564-74 (elaborating at length upon the manner in
    which seats on the JSC are filled in practice).
111 See id. at 1568-69.
112 See id. at 1571.
113 See Colombo, supra note 99, at 747 (“[A]lmost every Japanese law professor reads
    (and very often speaks fluently) at least one, but often more than one foreign
    language … and has a deep knowledge of a foreign jurisdiction among the most
    ‘prestigious’: France, Germany, England or the US.”); infra Table 1 (contrasting the
    foreign educational credentials of constitutional law professors at elite Japanese and
    American law schools).
88                                               《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



also the ones who are most likely to “go to the library themselves” to
                          114
research foreign law.

      The chōsakan, elite career judges who are selected by the General
                                                                                  115
Secretariat to assist the JSC for several years as law clerks,                          are
neither required nor expected to possess foreign legal training or foreign
language skills. However, the fact that a particular judge has studied
abroad is considered an “advantage” for purposes of chōsakan
               116
recruitment.         In addition, the General Secretariat reportedly attempts
to ensure that the JSC has at least one German-trained and one French-
trained chōsakan (out of a total of thirty-seven) to address any needs for
German or French legal research that may arise. In recent years, roughly
half of the chōsakan at any given time are likely to have studied law
overseas, a fact that reflects both the growing scope of the judiciary’s
study-abroad program and the recruitment advantage enjoyed by alumni
of the program. Most of the former chōsakan interviewed by the author
reported that they had at some point performed foreign legal research,
either upon their own initiative or at the request of a justice.

     E. Level of Interaction with Foreign Courts
      The JSC’s level of interaction with foreign courts falls between the
extremes of the TCC, which is frequently thwarted by Taiwan’s lack of
                                117
diplomatic recognition,               and the KCC and HKCFA, both of which




114 Interview with Justice F, supra note 74.
115 See Law, supra note 79, at 1557.
116 Interview with Justice F, supra note 74.
117 See Law & Chang, supra note 11, at 540-43, 548-57 (describing Taiwan’s diplomatic
     isolation and various consequences for the judiciary of this isolation); infra Section
     IV.E.
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                        89
                Approach to Comparativism

                                                                118
possess strong institutional ties to courts elsewhere.                Members of the
JSC have regular opportunities to make official visits to foreign courts
and jurisdictions. Each year, five of the fifteen justices are eligible to
take a one-week overseas trip at the court’s expense. Their destinations
have run the gamut from the usual suspects (such the U.S. Supreme
Court and the ECtHR) to courts that are somewhat off the beaten path,
such as the Supreme Court of the Vatican City State, the Supreme
Constitutional Court of Egypt, the U.S. District Court for the Northern
District of Illinois, and the Constitutional Court of Slovenia.

      The extent to which individual justices actually travel overseas
varies widely. In this respect, the JSC is probably no different from any
              119
other court.        Over the course of roughly a decade on the JSC, one
exceptionally well-traveled justice met judges from twenty-eight
countries and visited every continent except South America, but this
individual had served as a diplomat prior to joining the court and was by
all accounts highly atypical. A more typical member of the JSC might
journey abroad every other year. Several justices cited the pressures of
the JSC’s enormous docket as a factor preventing more frequent
       120
travel.




118 See infra Sections III.E, V.E.
119 The same could be said, for example, of European courts. See BOBEK, supra note 11,
    at 50 (observing of Continental courts that “it tends to be always the same few
    members of the court who participate in the various international meetings”).
    Particular justices may have unique responsibilities that demand greater travel, such
    as the KCC member who represents South Korea before the Venice Commission, or
    the TCC member who played a leadership role in the International Association of
    Women Judges.
120 See supra notes 85-86 and accompanying text (discussing the size of the JSC’s
    docket).
90                                               《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



      Like many other courts, the JSC regularly welcomes judicial
visitors from other countries, although its efforts at affirmative outreach
pale in comparison to those of the KCC. The JSC does host a prominent
legal figure from abroad on an annual basis. Past guests have included
the chief justices of the United Kingdom Supreme Court, the French
Cour de Cassation, the German Supreme Court, the ECtHR, and the U.S.
Supreme Court. The guest is typically selected on the basis of group
discussion among the fifteen justices.



III. THE KOREAN CONSTITUTIONAL COURT

     A. Level of Foreign Law Citation
      It is relatively rare for the KCC to actually cite foreign law in its
opinions. Sources inside the KCC estimated that foreign law, in the form
of judicial precedent or otherwise, is explicitly cited in no more than 5 to
                      121
10% of decisions.

     B. Level of Foreign Law Usage
      Although the KCC is reluctant to cite foreign law, it has embraced
the use of foreign law. The degree to which the KCC has routinized and
institutionalized foreign legal research is breathtaking. Its mechanisms
for researching and analyzing foreign law range from specialized
researchers hired specifically for their foreign legal credentials, to the


121 See, e.g., Interview with Official A, Current or Former Constitutional Research
     Officer of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Korea, in Location Concealed
     (Feb. 25, 2011); Interview with Official B, Current or Former Constitutional Research
     Officer of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Korea, in Seoul, Korea ( July 6,
     2011).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                   91
                Approach to Comparativism

establishment of a freestanding research institute that publishes
comparative constitutional scholarship and monitors the work of
constitutional courts around the world.

     Sources inside the KCC gave estimates of how frequently foreign
legal research is conducted that ranged from 60% of cases to
           122
“always.”        The decision to research foreign law in a given case is
usually made by the Constitutional Research Officer (CRO) responsible
for preparing the bench memorandum. As discussed below, CROs are
roughly equivalent to law clerks but are significantly more experienced
and much more likely to possess foreign legal training than their
American counterparts. On rare occasions — perhaps 5 to 10% of the
time — foreign legal research will be performed at the specific request
             123
of a justice.

     C. Jurisdictions Considered
     The jurisdictions most often considered by the KCC are Germany,
the United States, and Japan, in roughly that order. Interest in the case
law of the ECtHR is growing, and research on French law is also
conducted from time to time. The KCC’s attention to German and
Japanese law is partly a legacy of the imposition of Japanese law during
the colonial period. Because Japanese law at the time was inspired by
German law, Korean law borrows heavily but indirectly from German
law as well. Research on German law is conducted at least half of the
     124
time.


122 Interview with Judge 1, Korean District Court Judge, in Location Concealed (Date
    Concealed) (quoting a judge employed at the KCC).
123 See Interview with Official A, supra note 121.
124 See id.; E-Mail from Unnamed Official, Constitutional Court of the Republic of
    Korea, to author (Aug. 30, 2013, 03:37 EST) (on file with author).
92                                               《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



      American law receives attention in approximately 20% of cases and
is especially likely to be considered in freedom of expression and habeas
corpus cases. The lack of social and economic rights in the U.S.
Constitution was identified by several sources as a factor that limits the
relevance of American jurisprudence to the KCC. However, the use of
American law is on the rise. Korean emphasis on the acquisition of English-
language skills and interest in professional opportunities for American-
trained lawyers have helped to tip the balance of foreign legal training
away from German law toward American law. It is widely felt among
younger Koreans, including law students, that English opens a wider
range of professional opportunities than other languages such as German.

      Japanese law is considered in a small, and declining, proportion of
cases, in the neighborhood of 15%. Cases involving older statutes that
date back to Japan’s occupation of Korea continue to call for Japanese
legal research. However, Japan was described as offering “little
constitutional jurisprudence” and “little to learn” because the JSC is “too
                                                      125
conservative” and “never strikes anything down.”            Through the mid-
1980s, the training curriculum for Korean judges included a Japanese
language requirement. It is perhaps both a cause and a symptom of
declining judicial interest in Japanese law that the requirement was
abandoned in the late 1980s.

      Like the JSC and TCC, the KCC appears to pay relatively little
attention to courts from common law jurisdictions other than the U.S.
Supreme Court. Neither the Canadian Supreme Court nor the South
African Constitutional Court was identified as a major influence or
regular point of comparison. A recently retired justice opined that the


125 Interview with Official A, supra note 121.
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                           93
                Approach to Comparativism

KCC is “expanding its repertoire, slowly” and cited as evidence the
deliberate recruitment of researchers to specialize in the European Court
                       126
of Human Rights.             However, when asked about the actual impact of
the ECtHR, a veteran court official indicated that its jurisprudence is
                                                                 127
considered “from time to time,” but “not that often.”

      The holdings in the KCC’s library offer a rough but quantifiable
proxy for the court’s interest in specific jurisdictions and in foreign law
more generally. Of the roughly 125,000 volumes held by the library,
                                 128
55% are of foreign origin.             The library’s constitutional law collection
is skewed even more heavily in a comparative direction. German
volumes make up 28% of the collection, while Korean volumes make up
                129
only 25.5%.           English-speaking jurisdictions (including the United
States, the United Kingdom, and the rest of the Commonwealth) together
contribute 18.6% of the total, while Japan by itself accounts for 16%.
Another 5% are from France, and a mere 1.3% are from Austria.

     D. Level of Foreign Law Expertise
      The KCC’s means of learning about foreign legal systems are
remarkably varied and extensive. Its repositories of foreign legal
expertise include: (1) the justices who have studied overseas; (2) the


126 Interview with Justice A, Former Member of the Constitutional Court of the
    Republic of Korea, in Seoul, Korea (Sept. 6, 2011).
127 Telephone Interview with Unnamed Official, Constitutional Court of the Republic of
    Korea (Aug. 22, 2013).
128 The figures reported here were provided to the author by the KCC library’s
    circulation desk in the form of a spreadsheet dated October 30, 2014. As of that date,
    the KCC’s library contained a total of 125,941 titles, of which 56,830 (or 45.12%)
    were classified as domestic in origin.
129 Per the statistics cited above in note 128, the library holds 19,890 volumes on
    constitutional law, 14,813 of which are of foreign origin. In the area of constitutional
    law, German volumes outnumber Korean volumes by a margin of 5,647 to 5,077.
94                                             《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



permanent law clerks who possess foreign legal expertise; (3) the law
clerks hired as specialists in foreign law; (4) the law professors who
work for the court on a part-time basis; (5) experts hired by the parties;
and (6) the newly established Constitutional Research Institute. Each
will be discussed in turn.

     1. The Justices Themselves

     With respect to the proportion of its membership that has studied
law abroad, the KCC falls between the JSC and the TCC. Four of the
nine justices have studied law overseas: three hold LL.M. degrees from
the United States (two from the University of Michigan, one from
Southern Methodist University), and one studied criminal law at the
                                        130
Max Planck Institute in Germany.              The members of the KCC have all
traditionally been recruited from the career judiciary or the prosecutor’s
office; no law professor has ever been appointed to the KCC.

     The level of foreign training possessed by the justices is likely to
grow over time as a result of the Korean judiciary’s expanding study-
                    131
abroad program.           At present, the Korean judiciary provides funding
for roughly sixty judges to study overseas for one year at government
          132
expense.        Judges who apply successfully for this program are awarded
full tuition and a stipend that is slightly lower than their usual judicial
       133
salary.      Another forty or so judges are given a lower level of financial


130 See E-mail from Unnamed Official, Constitutional Court of the Republic of Korea,
    to author (Sept. 5, 2013, 20:57 EST) (on file with author); E-mail from Unnamed
    Official, Constitutional Court of the Republic of Korea, to author (Sept. 5, 2013,
    19:39 EST) (on file with author).
131 The Ministry of Justice operates a comparable program for Korean prosecutors.
132 See Interview with Judge 1, supra note 122.
133 See id.; REPUBLIC OF KOREA JUDICIARY, OFFICE OF COURT ADMIN., PERSONNEL
    ADMIN. AGENCY, 2013 NYEONDO HAEUEYEONSU ANNAE [2013 STUDY ABROAD
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                       95
                Approach to Comparativism

support to study abroad for a shorter period of six months as visiting
          134
scholars.       Judges are ordinarily eligible to apply for the study-abroad
program from their seventh through tenth years of service. Given that
there are roughly two hundred judges in any given cohort, the overall
proportion of Korean judges who study abroad at some point approaches,
                              135
if not exceeds, one-half.           Moreover, the Korean Supreme Court has
recently announced a dramatic expansion of the program: all judges
appointed after 2003 have now been promised the opportunity to study
                                                                            136
abroad, albeit as visiting scholars rather than degree candidates.

      The official application for overseas study lists as possible
destinations the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, Germany,
France, Switzerland, Japan, China, Spain, Russia, Australia, and Italy,
but the list is not exclusive, and other countries may be requested “with
enough evidence of necessity.” Judges express their preferences for
particular institutions from a list approved by the Korean Supreme Court,
which allocates applicants among the various institutions. The judges
themselves are then responsible for gaining admission to the institutions
to which they are assigned. As a practical matter, a major obstacle to a
successful application is demonstration of the requisite language skills:
some judges attend cram school on weekends in order to muster the
necessary TOEFL score.




    GUIDE] 6-7 (on file with author).
134 See Interview with Judge 1, supra note 122.
135 There are roughly 200 judges in any given cohort, which means that approximately
    800 judges are within the four-year eligibility window at any given time. Meanwhile,
    over the course of any given four-year period, roughly 400 judges will be selected
    for some form of overseas study.
136 See Interview with Judge 1, supra note 122.
96                                               《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



      Notwithstanding the historical importance of German and Japanese
law, roughly two-thirds of Korean judges opt for English-speaking
jurisdictions, with a particular bias in favor of the United States. For the
2013-2014 academic year, out of a total of sixty-five judges receiving
full funding for their overseas studies, forty-three selected English-
speaking countries, of which the overwhelming majority (thirty-five) chose
the United States (thirteen as LL.M. students and twenty-two more as
                     137
visiting scholars).        The United Kingdom has three, Canada and Australia
each have two, and one opted for the Netherlands (which the Korean
judiciary classifies as an English-speaking jurisdiction for purposes of
                  138
study abroad).          By contrast, eight judges went to German-speaking
                                                                                139
countries (six to Germany itself, one to Austria, and one to Switzerland).
Only two chose Japan, which is now tied with China and is less popular
                                                                  140
than either France (five judges) or Spain (three judges).

      Both the judicial preference for English-speaking countries, and the
level of familiarity in Korea with American law more generally, are
likely to grow in the future. A number of Korean judges attributed the
preference for English-speaking countries to the heavy premium that
Korean society places on the acquisition of English-language skills.
Judges view time spent in the United States as an opportunity for their
children to be exposed to the American educational system and to learn
English. Law students in particular value English for the access that it
gives them to the American legal market as well as elite Korean law
firms, which have recruited large numbers of foreign-qualified


137 See E-mail from Unnamed Official, Constitutional Court of the Republic of Korea,
     to author (Oct. 1, 2013, 19:28 EST) (on file with author).
138 See id.
139 See id.
140 See id.
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                      97
                Approach to Comparativism

           141
lawyers.         These trends are both reflected and reinforced by
government regulation of Korean legal education. The law school
accreditation committee established by the Korean ministry of education
has adopted guidelines that call upon Korean law schools to offer at least
                                          142
eight courses in foreign languages.              Although some law schools offer
courses in Japanese and Chinese, the majority of the foreign-language
                            143
offerings are in English.

     2. Constitutional Research Officers (CROs)

     Compared to their Japanese, Taiwanese, and American counterparts,
the justices of the KCC have access to higher levels of research
assistance and foreign legal expertise. The KCC has at its disposal four
types of support personnel who possess varying levels of foreign legal
training and perform a combination of distinct and overlapping tasks:
Constitutional Research Officers (CROs), Constitutional Researchers
(CRs), Academic Advisers, and researchers at the KCC’s Constitutional
Research Institute.

     Of these four types, the CROs are most analogous to law clerks of
the American variety but are more numerous and more experienced.
Most CROs are permanent employees who have passed the infamously
                                           144
demanding Korean bar examination                  and are comparable in rank and


141 See Anthony Lin, Made In USA, ASIAN LAW., July 2013, at 16, 16-17 (citing
    statistics on the prevalence of foreign-qualified attorneys at top Korean law firms,
    and noting that the “vast majority of foreign lawyers at Korean firms are Korean
    Americans or Korean nationals who studied law in the United States”).
142 See E-mail from Yukyong Choe, Research Fellow, Judicial Policy Research Institute,
    Supreme Court of Korea, to author (Sept. 9, 2013 10:00:27 CST) (on file with author)
    (citing Ministry of Education, Science & Technology Directive 3.1.2.5).
143 See id.
144 Historically, the bar pass rate in Korea has rarely exceeded 5%. Kyong-Whan Ahn,
98                                              《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



pay to career judges. They are hired not by individual justices, but by the
                                                                                     145
President of the KCC upon a collective vote of the justices.
Relatively demanding eligibility requirements are imposed by statute: a
CRO must be a judge, prosecutor, or attorney; a legal academic of
assistant professor rank or higher at an accredited university; a “Grade 4
or higher” public employee with five or more years of experience in
“law-related positions in state agencies”; or a holder of a doctorate in
law with five or more years of “law-related” experience in a state agency,
                                                                                     146
university, or other research institute specified by KCC regulation.
Those who pass the selection process serve for renewable ten-year terms.
A relatively inexperienced CRO may possess two to four years of
experience; some possess over a decade of experience and have served
longer than the justices themselves.

      The KCC also has at its disposal a number of temporary CROs. The
Korean Supreme Court has a longstanding practice of dispatching judges
to assist the KCC. Likewise, the Ministry of Justice regularly loans
prosecutors to the KCC to serve as CROs. As of this writing, the KCC
has over seventy CROs in total, including fifty-six regular CROs (five of
whom are currently seconded to the Constitutional Research Institute),
fourteen judges on loan from the Korean Supreme Court, four
prosecutors on loan from the Ministry of Justice, and two temporary


    Law Reform in Korea and the Agenda of “Graduate Law School,” 24 WIS. INT’L L.J.
    223, 227 (2007). Both the bar examination system and the bar pass rate are currently
    in flux due to profound reforms of Korean legal education, including the introduction
    of American-style graduate law schools that award J.D. degrees in lieu of
    undergraduate law programs. See Thomas Chih-hsiung Chen, Legal Education
    Reform in Taiwan: Are Japan and Korea the Models?, 62 J. LEGAL EDUC. 32, 34
    (2012) (discussing legal education reforms in Korea).
145 See CONSTITUTIONAL COURT OF KOREA, supra note 88, at 115-16.
146 Id. (referencing the Constitutional Court Act as amended as of 1991).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                       99
                Approach to Comparativism

CROs on loan from miscellaneous government agencies (one from the
Korean equivalent of the Internal Revenue Service and another from the
Ministry of Government Legislation).

      Under reforms initiated by the KCC’s new chief justice in 2013, a
majority of the CROs are assigned to individual justices. Court
administrators assign to each justice the equivalent of three and a half
        147
CROs.         Typically, each justice is assigned two regular CROs plus a
career judge on loan from the Korean Supreme Court. In addition, each
justice shares a CRO from the prosecutor’s office with one other justice.
With the exception of a handful who perform administrative or
supervisory roles, the remaining CROs are divided by subject matter into
three teams: liberty rights (meaning civil and political rights), economic
and property rights, and social welfare rights (a category that includes
pension and social security issues). The KCC’s Constitutional
Researchers and Academic Advisers, who possess extensive foreign
                  148
legal expertise,        are also divided among the three subject-matter teams.
The clerks assigned to individual justices handle routine cases,
especially those that can be dismissed for jurisdictional or justiciability
reasons. Difficult or controversial cases are referred to the subject-matter
teams for group discussion.

      Over half of the regular CROs have studied law overseas, and all
are guaranteed the opportunity to do so at government expense after



147 The justices do not have the ability to select their own CROs from the overall pool.
    Otherwise, explained one administrator, “there would be a big mess, even war”
    among the justices over the most capable CROs. E-mail from Unnamed Official,
    Constitutional Court of the Republic of Korea, to author (Aug. 29, 2013, 22:24 EST).
148 See infra subsections III.D.3, III.D.4 (discussing the foreign training of the KCC’s
    Constitutional Researchers and Academic Advisers).
100                                             《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯


                                       149
three or four years of service.              As of this writing, out of fifty-six
regular CROs, twenty-five have studied in the United States as either
LL.M. candidates or visiting scholars, while six have studied in Europe
(specifically, Germany, France, and Spain). This geographical
breakdown reflects a significant shift in emphasis away from Germany
toward the United States. A veteran administrator at the KCC reminisced
that most of the initial cohort of CROs circa 1988 had studied law in
Germany before joining the KCC and came of age at a time when
German was widely taught in Korean high schools. By contrast, more
recent CROs who arrive at the KCC with the intention of studying in
Germany sometimes switch to the United States. The longer history of
judicial review in the United States was cited as one factor. Other
reasons for the shift toward the United States resemble those given by
judges participating in the Korean Supreme Court’s study-abroad
program, including the opportunity for children to learn English.

       Foreign legal study is not limited to enrollment at academic
institutions. The KCC also stations CROs directly with foreign courts.
Since 2011, the KCC has arranged for CROs to spend six months at the
U.S. Supreme Court performing research on specific topics. To be
selected for this program, a CRO must have previously studied in the
United States as either a visiting scholar or LL.M. candidate. Likewise,
the KCC has dispatched CROs to the German Constitutional Court to
perform analogous research. Prior work experience can also be a source
of foreign legal expertise, as in the case of one CRO who clerked at the
South African Constitutional Court before joining the KCC.



149 See Interview with Official B, supra note 121 (indicating that “literally everyone”
      who works as a CRO will eventually have studied law overseas).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                       101
                Approach to Comparativism

      Nor does the study of foreign law cease once CROs have returned
home. In recent years, the CROs have organized study groups that
translate prominent works of foreign legal scholarship into Korean. The
                                                                             150
resulting translations are distributed internally within the KCC.                  Other
study groups have focused on German and Spanish constitutional law.
The KCC also regularly hosts international conferences that present
additional opportunities for learning about foreign law. Both speakers at
the court’s first international symposium in 2012 hailed from Germany,
while the December 2013 international symposium on the topic of
welfare policy and constitutional adjudication featured prominent
scholars from Germany, France, and the United States.

     3. Constitutional Researchers (CRs)

      As if the foreign legal expertise of the CROs were not enough, the
KCC further bolsters its foreign legal research capabilities through the
use of both CRs and Academic Advisers. The defining characteristic of
CRs, as opposed to CROs, is that CRs are required to hold advanced
degrees in foreign law and are hired specifically for their expertise in
foreign law. Also unlike CROs, CRs are not permanent employees but
instead work for the court under one-year contracts that are renewable
up to a maximum of five years. As of this writing, a total of five CRs are
divided among the three subject-matter teams.

      CRs are asked to perform foreign legal research in one of two ways.
First, the head of a team may ask a CR to write a memorandum on how a


150 In 2006, for example, the U.S. constitutional law study group collectively translated
    the second edition of Professor Chemerinsky’s constitutional law treatise, ERWIN
    CHEMERINSKY, CONSTITUTIONAL LAW: PRINCIPLES AND POLICIES (2d ed. 2002), and
    in 2009, it selected Professor Farber’s treatise on the First Amendment, DANIEL A.
    FARBER, THE FIRST AMENDMENT (2d ed. 2002).
102                                          《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



pending case would be decided in a foreign jurisdiction. Second, CRs
routinely field requests from CROs for focused research on foreign law
in connection with specific cases. However, there is nothing to prevent
experienced or knowledgeable CROs from choosing to handle foreign
legal research themselves rather than delegate it to a CR.

      The educational backgrounds of the CRs reflect the emphasis
attached to certain countries. As of this writing, one holds a doctorate in
German law, another holds a doctorate in Japanese law, and three were
trained in the United States (two J.D. holders and one S.J.D. holder). The
two CRs assigned to the civil and political rights team are both U.S.-
trained. The social rights team has one U.S.-trained CR and one
German-trained CR, while the Japanese-trained CR is attached to the
economic and property rights team. Because expertise on particular
countries is unevenly allocated across teams, CRs routinely receive
requests for help from other teams. CRs are also expected to provide
coverage of additional countries according to their language skills. For
example, U.S.-trained CRs have been asked to research British law,
while the German-trained CR may be tasked with Austrian legal research.

      Expertise on specific countries tends to be in greater demand for
certain topics than for others. For example, civil and political rights
cases were described by a CR as requiring more foreign legal research,
“especially into U.S. law.” By contrast, U.S. law is viewed as less
relevant to social welfare rights cases “because we know the U.S.
                                                           151
Constitution doesn’t have social rights provisions.”




151 Telephone Interview with Unnamed Official, supra note 127.
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                   103
                Approach to Comparativism

     4. Academic Advisers

     The KCC also hires three professors in the fields of constitutional
and administrative law as “Academic Advisers” on a contractual basis.
One Academic Adviser is currently attached to each of the three subject-
matter teams. Academic Advisers have part-time contracts and spend
two days per week at the KCC participating in team discussion of
pending cases and consulting with the justices and head CRO.

     The standards of Korean legal academia ensure as a practical matter
that the professors who are recruited by the KCC possess extensive
comparative legal expertise. Constitutional law professors who lack
foreign law degrees are a rare breed in Korea. Historically, it was
difficult to find employment as a constitutional law professor in Korea
without German legal training or language skills. Among younger
generations of scholars, however, training in common law jurisdictions
in lieu of Germany has become increasingly common, if not typical.

     5. Experts Hired by the Parties

     The KCC holds oral argument in only a small handful of highly
important or controversial cases, on the order of one or two cases
          152
monthly.        In these rare cases, both sides to the dispute tend to retain
                                                             153
foreign law experts alongside regular counsel.                       These experts —
many of whom are former CROs in private practice or legal academia —
                                                                                154
submit written opinions then present their opinions at oral argument.



152 See E-mail from Unnamed Official, Constitutional Court of the Republic of Korea,
    to author (Mar. 15, 2014, 08:00:09 EST) (on file with author).
153 See id.
154 See id.
104                                               《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



       From time to time, court-appointed attorneys may also perform
foreign law research, but the amount is likely to be limited. By statute,
                                                                          155
all litigants before the KCC must be represented by counsel,                    and the
KCC has the power to appoint state-funded attorneys not only for
indigent parties, but also whenever it would be in the public interest to
        156
do so.        Roughly sixty attorneys per year are appointed from a list of
eligible attorneys that includes former members of the KCC and former
CROs as well as numerous individuals nominated by the Korean Bar
                 157
Association.           Although these attorneys sometimes research foreign
                                                    158
law, most are not foreign law experts,                    and the extremely modest
compensation that they receive — a flat rate of roughly $700 per case —
further limits the amount of foreign legal research that they can be
                           159
expected to conduct.

      6. The Constitutional Research Institute

       In 2011, the Korean legislature authorized the creation of a
Constitutional Research Institute (the Hunbeob Jaepan Yongu Won, or
CRI) under the auspices of the KCC. The CRI is billed on its website as
“a hub for research and education on constitution[s] and constitutional
                   160
adjudication.”           The KCC announcement of the CRI’s creation hails
South Korea for being “the first among some 80 countries having


155 See CONSTITUTIONAL COURT OF KOREA, supra note 88, at 122 (citing the
      Constitutional Court Act).
156 See id. at 123.
157 See E-mail from Unnamed Official, supra note 152. In 2012, the KCC appointed a
      total of sixty-two lawyers. See id.
158 See E-mail from Unnamed Official, Constitutional Court of the Republic of Korea,
      to author (Mar. 11, 2014, 03:32 CST) (on file with author).
159 See E-mail from Unnamed Official, supra note 152.
160 Greetings, CONST. CT. KOREA: CONST. RES. INST., http://ri.ccourt.go.kr/eng (follow
      “About CRI” hyperlink) (last visited Feb. 28, 2015) [http://perma.cc/95MV-63BK].
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                       105
                Approach to Comparativism

specialized and independent constitutional adjudication bodies to have
created a research institution under the authority of a constitutional
        161
court.”       The CRI was established during the tenure of former KCC
Chief Justice Kang-Kook Lee, who desired that the KCC become the
standard-bearer for constitutional adjudication in Asia and fashion a
viable jurisprudential alternative to the traditionally dominant European
                            162
and American models.              The CRI would further these goals, it was
argued, by equipping the KCC with the capacity to analyze, critique, and
improve upon foreign approaches.

      Led by the former dean of a prominent Korean law school, the CRI
is housed in a separate building from the KCC and boasts a staff of
approximately twenty-five researchers. Most of the CRI’s researchers
are contract employees limited to a maximum term of five years, and
CROs on loan from the KCC serve in supervisory roles. The researchers
are divided into four teams: Comparative Constitutional Law, Legal
Systems (or Legal Institutions), Basic Rights, and Instruction (or


161 Constitutional Research Institute Opens on Jan. 10, CONST. CT. KOREA, ( Jan. 10,
    2011, 13:16:22), www.ccourt.go.kr/home/english/welcome/news_view.jsp?seq=106
    [http://perma.cc/8E3M-W2AF]. A senior KCC official acknowledged that the
    Peruvian Constitutional Court also possesses its own dedicated research institute, the
    Centro de Estudios Constitucionales, albeit one that is much smaller in scale. The
    Argentinian Supreme Court also possesses a research institute. See Graciela
    Rodriguez-Ferrand, Argentina (describing the creation of a Foreign Research and
    Reference Institute within the Argentinian Supreme Court Library), in THE IMPACT
    OF FOREIGN LAW ON DOMESTIC JUDGMENTS 4, 7 (The Law Library of Congress, Mar.
    2010), available at http://www.loc.gov/law/help/domestic-judgment/impact-of-
    foreign-law.pdf.
162 See Telephone Interview with Unnamed Official, supra note 127. The KCC has
    openly proclaimed its goal of promoting throughout the world a “Korean system of
    constitutional justice” that “differs from the German or U.S. models.” The 3rd
    Congress of the World Conference on Constitutional Justice Ends in Success, CONST.
    CT. KOREA (Oct. 2, 2014), http://english.ccourt.go.kr/cckhome/eng/introduction/
    news/newsList.do [http://perma.cc/ZX7C-LR8Q].
106                                               《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



Education). With the exception of the Education Team — which is also
the smallest of the four teams — the work of the CRI has thus far
emphasized the study of foreign constitutional law in one form or
           163
another.         Its publications include annual reports on worldwide trends
in constitutional adjudication and bimonthly e-mail newsletters that have
touched on a wide range of countries from Algeria and Belgium to Peru
                 164
and Serbia.

       On occasion, the CRI does address explicitly domestic issues. For
example, the Legal Systems team’s responsibilities include the study of
constitutional issues surrounding Korean reunification. Even this issue,
however, has called for foreign legal research (on the topic of German
reunification), and the majority of the research papers generated by the
Legal Systems team have focused on various aspects of constitutional
justice in other countries, such as the operation of the U.S. Supreme
Court’s amicus curiae system and France’s transition from abstract to
concrete judicial review in 2008.

       CRI researchers are akin to the KCC’s in-house CRs in several
respects: they possess advanced degrees in foreign law, and their primary
responsibility is foreign legal research. Three-quarters hold doctorates,
while the remainder hold a J.D. or LL.M. from the United States.
However, the two types of researchers perform complementary functions.
Those at the KCC perform comparative research dictated by the
adjudication demands of specific cases, whereas those at the CRI
propose and pursue in-depth comparative research projects, free from the



163 The remit of the Education Team is to educate prospective attorneys, government
      employees, and the general public on issues of constitutionalism and the rule of law.
164 Telephone Interview with Unnamed Official, supra note 127.
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                      107
                Approach to Comparativism

urgency of having to resolve pending cases. In other words, although
researchers at both the KCC and CRI perform foreign legal research,
those at the CRI do so proactively as opposed to reactively.

     To expand its geographic coverage, the CRI also hires Korean-
speaking “foreign correspondents” who reside in other countries and
either possess legal training or work in the legal profession. Foreign
correspondents are responsible for keeping the CRI apprised on a regular
basis of constitutional adjudication in their respective countries. A recent
vacancy announcement for positions in “Spanish-speaking countries,” for
example, provides that correspondents will be required to submit bimonthly
                                                                          165
reports, for which they will be paid approximately $180 each.

     E. Level of Interaction with Foreign Courts
     In stark contrast to the TCC, the KCC’s level of engagement with
foreign courts can only be described as extremely high. Its international
outreach efforts are made possible by a combination of ambitious goals,
considerable resources, and unhindered access to foreign audiences. The
KCC boasts publicly of “transferring its experience and knowledge to a
number of other countries, including Cambodia, Indonesia, Mongolia,
                             166
Thailand, and Turkey.”             The court’s heavy commitment to foreign
interaction is reflected by the existence of a full-time International
Affairs Division with responsibility for organizing international
conferences, receiving foreign delegations, and supporting overseas
                                     167
visits by members of the court.


165 A copy of the vacancy announcement is on file with the author.
166 The 3rd Congress of the World Conference on Constitutional Justice Ends in Success,
    supra note 162.
167 See Interview with Unnamed Official, Constitutional Court of the Republic of Korea,
    in Seoul, Korea (Dec. 19, 2014) (indicating that staffing levels at the International
108                                             《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



      The KCC has capitalized upon its involvement in international
organizations to boost its influence and status in a number of ways. In
2006, South Korea became the first and only Asian member of the
Venice Commission, the Council of Europe’s advisory body on
constitutional       matters     and     the    practical      equivalent      of     an
intergovernmental think tank for promoting constitutionalism and the
              168
rule of law.        A visit to Europe by the president of the KCC coincided
with a desire on the part of the Commission to expand its membership
and influence to Asia, and South Korea was soon thereafter invited to
join the organization. Within the KCC, the invitation was widely
construed as “evidence of global recognition” and acceptance of the
                                                                                     169
KCC as the “epitome of Korean liberal democracy and rule of law.”
Thus far, South Korea’s representatives on the Commission have been
                           170
drawn from the KCC,              and the KCC’s own account of its first twenty
years brags of its responsibility as the “constitutional court of a country
with a flourishing constitutional system” for “assisting newly



    Affairs Division doubled to roughly twenty people to cope with preparations for the
    World Conference of Constitutional Justice hosted by the KCC); Organization,
    CONST. CT. KOREA, http://english.ccourt.go.kr/cckhome/eng/introduction/organization/
    organization.do (last visited Feb. 28, 2015) [http://perma.cc/5VL2-BYQD]
    (disclosing the existence of the “International Affairs Division” within the KCC’s
    “Planning and Coordination Office”).
168 The Venice Commission is known formally as the European Commission for
    Democracy Through Law and was founded following the collapse of the Soviet
    Union, but its ambitions and operations now extend well beyond the former Soviet
    bloc countries. See Paolo G. Carozza, “My Friend Is a Stranger”: The Death Penalty
    and the Global Ius Commune of Human Rights, 81 TEX. L. REV. 1031, 1067 (2003)
    (summarizing the history and goals of the Venice Commission).
169 See Telephone Interview with Unnamed Official, supra note 127.
170 As of this writing, the South Korean delegate to the Venice Commission is Justice Il-
    Won Kang of the KCC. Members of the Venice Commission, COUNCIL EUR.: VENICE
    COMMISSION, http://www.venice.coe.int/WebForms/members/default.aspx (last visited
    Feb. 28, 2015) [http://perma.cc/839W-6ZWD].
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                      109
                Approach to Comparativism

                                                                 171
democratizing countries” via the Venice Commission.

      The KCC is not content merely to participate in international
judicial organizations, but instead aggressively pursues leadership
opportunities. With the encouragement and financial support of the
Venice Commission, the KCC established in 2010 the Association of
                                                172
Asian Constitutional Courts (AACC),                   a regional organization that
                                                173
mirrors the Commission’s objectives                   and counts as its charter
members the constitutional courts of Indonesia, Malaysia, Mongolia, the
Philippines, Thailand, and Uzbekistan, in addition to the KCC itself. The
KCC has made no secret of either its role in the AACC or its desire to
enhance Korean influence and status through such initiatives. The
AACC’s website praises the KCC’s “leading role” in launching the
organization and characterizes the AACC’s first meeting as “a good
opportunity for Korea to enhance its international status as chair country
that led the AACC’s creation and also to promote to the world about [sic]
                                                                         174
its economic development and judicial advancement.”                            Korean
leadership, if not domination, of the AACC is further evidenced by the
absence of Japan, Taiwan, and China. Although overtures were made to
both the JSC and TCC, the AACC is viewed by the TCC as a thoroughly


171 CONSTITUTIONAL COURT OF KOREA, supra note 88, at 143.
172 See 7th Conference of Asian Constitutional Court Judges Dealing With “Election
    Laws,” KONRAD-ADENAUER-STIFTUNG: RULE OF LAW PROGRAMME ASIA,
    http://www.kas.de/rspa/en/events/41710 (last visited Feb. 28, 2015) [http://perma.cc/
    4B4H-64SF] (noting the adoption of the Jakarta Declaration, which established the
    Association of Asian Constitutional Courts).
173 For a formal statement of the AACC’s objectives, see Statute, ASS’N ASIAN CONST.
    CTS. & EQUIVALENT INSTITUTIONS, http://www.aaccei.org/ccourt?act=statute
    [http://perma.cc/FVN7-Y7XD].
174 See The Constitutional Court of Korea to Host the AACC’s Inaugural Congress, ASS’N
    ASIAN CONST. CTS. & EQUIVALENT INSTITUTIONS (May 16, 2012), http://www.aaccei.
    org/ccourt?act=noticeView&bbsId=3100&bbsSeqn=245 [http://perma.cc/CW8D-AVCF].
110                                            《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



Korean undertaking, while various members of the JSC professed
ignorance of the AACC’s existence. More recently — and once again
with the endorsement of the Venice Commission — the KCC has also
proposed the creation of an Asian Court of Human Rights, which it
                                               175
would play a leading role in organizing.

      International conferences are another part of the KCC’s strategy for
achieving prominence in the judicial world. Membership in the Venice
Commission contributed to the selection of South Korea to host the third
congress of the World Conference on Constitutional Justice (WCCJ) in
                        176
September of 2014.            The Commission acts as the secretariat for the
WCCJ and reportedly favored an Asian venue after the first two
                                                         177
meetings in Cape Town and Rio de Janeiro.                      After broaching the
possibility with the KCC, it chose South Korea over Indonesia to host
            178
the event.        The KCC seized upon this opportunity to promote itself
and assert its leadership within the region. Its efforts to impress the
foreign judges in attendance included a multimedia campaign featuring
Olympic figure skater and beloved national icon Yuna Kim as the
                                                                                    179
official Goodwill Ambassador of the Constitutional Court of Korea.


175 See 3RD CONGRESS OF THE WORLD CONFERENCE ON CONSTITUTIONAL JUSTICE,
    SEOUL COMMUNIQUÉ (Sept. 30, 2014), available at http://www.venice.coe.int/wccj/
    seoul/WCCJ_Seoul_Communique-E.pdf (describing “the initiative of the
    Constitutional Court of the Republic of Korea to promote discussions on human
    rights co-operation, including the possibility of establishing an Asian human rights
    court”).
176 See Overview, 3RD CONG. WORLD CONF. ON CONST. JUST., http://en.wccj2014.kr/eng/
    wccj3/overview.do (last visited Feb. 28, 2015) [http://perma.cc/FHY5-U56C]
    (describing the congress and its venue).
177 E-mail from Unnamed Official, Constitutional Court of Korea, to author (Sept. 16,
    2013, 20:32 EST).
178 See id.
179 See Yuna Kim’s Promotional Video for 3rd Congress of the World Conference on
    Constitutional Justice (WCCJ), ALL THAT YUNA (Sept. 18, 2014), http://yunakimfan.
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                      111
                Approach to Comparativism

It also capitalized upon the high-profile forum of the WCCJ to unveil its
                                                       180
proposal for an Asian Court of Human Rights.                 As with the AACC, the
congress was held without the participation of Japan, Taiwan, or China.



IV. THE TAIWANESE CONSTITUTIONAL COURT

     A. Level of Foreign Law Citation
      The published opinions of the TCC give the superficial appearance
of a court that makes relatively little use of foreign law. Actual citation
of foreign law is rare, especially in majority opinions. Of the 644
constitutional decisions rendered from January 1949 to June 2008, only
four majority opinions (0.62%) cited foreign judicial precedent, and only
                                                               181
eight (1.4%) cited a foreign constitution or statute.                Concurring and
dissenting opinions are more likely than majority opinions to mention
foreign law: out of 554 separate opinions authored over the same period,
74 (13.4%) cited foreign precedent, while 121 (21.8%) cited foreign
                             182
constitutions or statutes.



    com/2014/09/18/40786 [http://perma.cc/VE7Z-MNPT] (featuring English and
    Korean promotional videos in which Yuna Kim introduces herself as “Goodwill
    Ambassador for the Constitutional Court of Korea” and hails the conference for
    “bring[ing] together the top leaders of constitutional justice such as presidents of
    constitutional courts and chief justices of supreme courts from almost 100 countries
    around the world”).
180 See supra note 175 and accompanying text.
181 Law & Chang, supra note 11, at 557; see also Wen-Chen Chang & Jiunn-Rong Yeh,
    Judges as Discursive Agent: The Use of Foreign Precedents by the Constitutional
    Court of Taiwan (analyzing the TCC’s use of foreign precedent through 2010), in
    THE USE OF FOREIGN PRECEDENTS BY CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES, supra note 11, at
    373, 381-86.
182 Law & Chang, supra note 11, at 557.
112                                                《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



       The lack of explicit citation of foreign law is attributable at least
partly to the conventions of judicial opinion-writing in Taiwan.
Traditionally, opinions for the court are concise and do not contain
footnotes. As a result, any references to foreign law must take up limited
space in the main text of the opinion, which renders them conspicuous
and awkward. By contrast, separate opinions follow what one justice
                                                                                           183
described as a “less rigid” form that allows for footnotes.
Consequently, separate opinions cite foreign law more frequently than
majority opinions, and 80% of those citations appear in footnotes.

      B. Level of Foreign Law Usage
       The TCC’s published opinions barely hint at the full extent to which
the court investigates foreign law. For a majority of the justices,
comparative constitutional analysis is a virtually automatic practice.
Multiple justices indicated that they “consult foreign constitutional
                                                                                           184
materials” in “almost every case” or “ninety-plus percent” of the time.
The rare exceptions are cases in which foreign law is obviously
unhelpful or irrelevant, such as a separation-of-powers dispute involving
the Examination Yuan, one of the five branches of a convoluted


183 Interview with Justice B, Current or Former Member of the Constitutional Court of
      the Republic of China, in Taipei, Taiwan (Nov. 19, 2010).
184 Interview with Justice A, Current or Former Member of the Constitutional Court of
      the Republic of China, in Taipei, Taiwan (Nov. 12, 2010); Interview with Justice B,
      supra note 183; see also, e.g., Interview with Justice K, Current or Former Member
      of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of China, in Taipei, Taiwan ( Jan. 3, 2011)
      (deeming it “really obvious that German-trained justices will investigate German law
      maybe eighty to ninety percent of the time”); Interview with Clerk 2, Law Clerk to a
      Justice of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of China, in Taipei, Taiwan (Nov.
      17, 2010) (observing that foreign legal research occurs in “almost every case”). But
      see Interview with Justice I, Current or Former Member of the Constitutional Court
      of the Republic of China, in Taipei, Taiwan (Dec. 27, 2010) (indicating that the
      frequency of foreign legal research is “definitely not ninety-plus percent of the time”).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                         113
                Approach to Comparativism

governmental structure that is part of Sun-Yat Sen’s intellectual legacy
                                                                 185
and unique to the Republic of China’s Constitution.

      Even the justices who are relatively infrequent users of foreign law
by the standards of the TCC still use it frequently in absolute terms. The
most conservative estimate of foreign law usage was given by a law
clerk who indicated that the justice for whom he works, a career judge,
consults foreign law in one or two out of every six cases. It was widely
(but not universally) agreed that justices appointed from the career
judiciary tend to be more skeptical of the value and relevance of foreign
                                                         186
law than those from academic backgrounds.                      The justices who were
not themselves former academics tended to be more circumspect about
the extent to which they consult foreign law, saying only that “it depends
                187
on the case,”         or that they engage in comparative research “only if we
                                                           188
think there is relevant foreign law to guide us.”


185 See MINGUO XIANFA ZENGXIU TIAOWEN art. 6 (2000) (Taiwan) (setting forth the
    powers and composition of the Examination Yuan). Notwithstanding its defeat in
    mainland China at the hands of the Communists, the Republic of China continues to
    control Taiwan and a number of smaller neighboring islands. See Law & Chang,
    supra note 11, at 540-43 (summarizing the history of the Republic of China, and
    describing the competing claims to sovereignty over Taiwan).
186 Compare, e.g., Interview with Justice C, Current or Former Member of the
    Constitutional Court of the Republic of China, in Taipei, Taiwan (Nov. 26, 2010),
    Interview with Clerk 6, Law Clerk to a Justice of the Constitutional Court of the
    Republic of China, in Taipei, Taiwan (Nov. 25, 2010), Interview with Clerk 8, Law
    Clerk to a Justice of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of China, in Taipei,
    Taiwan (Nov. 26, 2010), and Interview with Clerk 9, Law Clerk to a Justice of the
    Constitutional Court of the Republic of China, in Taipei, Taiwan (Dec. 27, 2010) (all
    indicating that career judges are less inclined to use foreign law), with Interview with
    Justice B, supra note 183, and Interview with Clerk 3, Law Clerk to a Justice of the
    Constitutional Court of the Republic of China, in Taipei, Taiwan (Nov. 22, 2010)
    (arguing that career judges are no less inclined to use foreign law).
187 Interview with Justice G, Current or Former Member of the Constitutional Court of
    the Republic of China, in Taipei, Taiwan (Dec. 27, 2010).
188 Interview with Justice I, supra note 184.
114                                              《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



      When hired, law clerks are often told that their “primary
                                                                   189
responsibility” will be comparative legal research.                      For the small
minority of cases that are decided on the merits, comparative legal
research is “the most basic thing” that the clerks do and is required
                                         190
“probably 100% of the time.”                   Various clerks also reported that
analysis of the TCC’s own precedent typically comprises only a “very
small portion” of the reports that they prepare for the justices on each
                                                                                       191
case; the “vast majority” of the typical report is foreign legal research.
Indeed, foreign constitutional law is taken so seriously that the
Taiwanese judiciary itself publishes and sells hardbound Chinese
translations of case law from constitutional courts that are considered
most influential in Taiwan — namely, the U.S. Supreme Court, the
German Bundesverfassungsgericht and, most recently, the ECtHR, but
                      192
no longer the JSC.



189 Interview with Clerk 1, Law Clerk to a Justice of the Constitutional Court of the
    Republic of China, in Taipei, Taiwan (Nov. 17, 2010); Interview with Clerk 2, supra
    note 184.
190 Interview with Clerk 3, supra note 186.
191 Interview with Clerk 1, supra note 189; Interview with Clerk 2, supra note 184.
192 Sources inside the TCC attribute the Judicial Yuan’s recent discontinuation of the
    translation of JSC decisions to a “lack of resources,” Interview with Justice B, supra
    note 183, combined with the fact that the influence of the JSC on Taiwanese
    constitutional law “is obviously declining, severely,” Interview with Clerk 2, supra
    note 184. This decline was attributed, in turn, to a variety of mutually reinforcing
    factors. One is the growing willingness and greater ability on the part of the justices
    to “cut out the middleman” and look directly to U.S. and German law, from which
    Japanese constitutional jurisprudence borrows heavily. Another is the fact that few of
    the current justices or clerks have Japanese legal training, which both reflects and
    accelerates the decline of Japanese influence. Third is a growing sense that the JSC is
    simply too conservative and too willing to uphold government action for its
    decisions to be of continuing interest or use to the TCC. On the increasingly rare
    occasions that a justice attempts to argue in favor of the (invariably conservative)
    Japanese approach, other justices are said to object that Japan is “not really an open,
    free country,” that there is consequently “no need to look at what they’re saying,”
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                      115
                Approach to Comparativism

      All agreed that consulting foreign constitutional materials is simply
not controversial, and that there is no meaningful correlation between a
justice’s “politics” in a “liberal” versus “conservative” sense and his or
her willingness to consider foreign law. As one clerk observed,
                                                               193
“Conservatives use foreign law too. They all use it.”

     C. Jurisdictions Considered
      The major objects of comparative study for the TCC are Germany,
the United States, Austria, and Japan. However, interest in Japanese
constitutional law is in sharp and conspicuous decline, as evidenced by
the Taiwanese judiciary’s decision to stop publishing translations of JSC
decisions. Much as in Korea, officials attributed the turn away from
Japanese jurisprudence to the JSC’s overwhelming conservatism in the
area of constitutional law and consequent failure to produce noteworthy
                                   194
constitutional jurisprudence.            By contrast, consideration of ECtHR
and Korean jurisprudence remains rare but is on the rise. From time to
time, the TCC’s clerks survey countries in the English-speaking world
other than the United States. Historically, the TCC enjoyed a close
relationship with the South African judiciary in particular: South Africa
under apartheid was one of the few nations that extended diplomatic



    Interview with Clerk 5, Law Clerk to a Justice of the Constitutional Court of the
    Republic of China, in Taipei, Taiwan (Nov. 22, 2010), and that Taiwan ought to look
    to “more advanced or progressive countries.” Interview with Clerk 6, supra note 186;
    accord Interview with Clerk 8, supra note 186; Interview with Clerk 4, Law Clerk to
    a Justice of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of China, in Taipei, Taiwan
    (Nov. 22, 2010). Yet another cause, related to the immediately preceding one, is that
    Japanese legal scholarship has become a substitute for Japanese case law because, as
    compared to the case law, the scholarship is more “solid,” “fully developed,” and
    “critical” and thus of greater use to the TCC. Interview with Clerk 4, supra.
193 Interview with Clerk 5, supra note 192.
194 See supra note 192.
116                                             《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



recognition to Taiwan and hosted Taiwanese judges on an official
         195
basis.         Those ties, however, have lapsed, and neither the South
African Constitutional Court nor any other common law court apart
from the U.S. Supreme Court was described by any of the justices or
clerks interviewed as a regular source of inspiration.

      There is a strong relationship between the educational backgrounds
of the justices and the sources of foreign law that they prefer to cite.
Justices with German law degrees account for 87% of citations to
German precedent and 60% of citations to German constitutional or
                          196
statutory provisions.           Likewise, justices with some form of American
legal training were responsible for 61.7% of citations to American
               197
precedent.           Moreover, the period during which citations to the U.S.
Supreme          Court      outnumbered          citations     to     the      German
Bundesverfassungsgericht (1985 to 1994) coincided with the period
during which justices educated in the United States outnumbered justices
                            198
educated in Germany.              These correlations are not difficult to explain:
                                  199
in Taiwan as elsewhere,                 judges are more likely to use what they
know than what they do not know.


195 See Law & Chang, supra note 11, at 548 (noting that visiting members of the TCC
    attended a party in their honor with members of the South African Constitutional
    Court and were even invited to tour the country).
196 See id. at 558.
197 See id.
198 See Chang & Yeh, supra note 181, at 383, 384 tbl.1 (describing the educational
    background and foreign citation habits of the justices during the TCC’s fifth term).
199 See, e.g., Gérard V. La Forest, The Use of American Precedents in Canadian Courts,
    46 ME. L. REV. 211, 213 (1994) (noting a “definite link” between the use of
    American precedent by Canadian Supreme Court justices and the training of those
    justices in the United States); L’Heureux-Dubé, supra note 9, at 20 (“Judges, lawyers,
    and academics who go abroad for parts of their education . . . naturally turn for
    inspiration and comparison to those jurisdictions whose ideas are [already] familiar
    to them.”).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                         117
                Approach to Comparativism

     D. Level of Foreign Law Expertise
      The TCC is highly knowledgeable about how courts elsewhere
have approached similar issues. If the justices fail to cite or adopt
another court’s approach to a particular question, they do so out of
choice, not out of ignorance. “If it’s been covered elsewhere,” assured
one clerk, “they have considered it. They might not follow [the foreign
                                           200
approach], but they’ll consider it.”             One justice put it bluntly: “We are
already fully knowledgeable about foreign law. The problem is
                                                                                201
translating this knowledge into our social and political context.”

      For the most part, the justices and their clerks acquire their
extensive knowledge of foreign law in traditional ways: they study it in
school, they conduct research, and they talk to their colleagues. As of
this writing, eleven of the fifteen justices hold either an LL.M. or Ph.D.
in law from another country; three have studied law in more than one
foreign country. Seven have studied in Germany, four in the United
States, two in Japan, and one in mainland China. The fact that a majority
of the justices are former law professors contributes to the high level of
                           202
foreign legal training.          In Taiwan—and indeed in most of East Asia,


200 Interview with Clerk 2, supra note 184.
201 Interview with Justice F, Current or Former Justice, Constitutional Court of the
    Republic of China, in Taipei, Taiwan (Dec. 27, 2010).
202 By statute, law professors constitute one of the five categories of persons eligible for
    appointment to the TCC, and no single category is supposed to comprise more than
    one-third of the court’s members. See Ssu Fa Yuan Tsu Chih Fa [Organic Act of the
    Judicial Yuan], art. 4, para. 1, 37 XIANXING FAGUI HUIBIAN 25399, 25400 (1957)
    (Taiwan). In practice, “flexible interpretation” of the categories, combined with the
    fact that many candidates fall under multiple categories, has meant that a majority of
    the justices are former academics. Law & Chang, supra note 11, at 545-46 & 545
    n.93. The TCC is not unusual among specialized constitutional courts in having
    designated seats for legal academics. See Saunders, supra note 11, at 578 (noting that
    the “mode of appointment” to specialized constitutional courts “often includes a
118                                              《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



but not the United States — it is common for constitutional law
                                                               203
professors to possess a law degree from overseas.

       The TCC does not have nearly the same range of resources for
conducting foreign legal research as the KCC, but Taiwan’s justices
make the most of what they have. Each justice is allotted only one law
clerk, and there are no shared clerks. The clerks do not serve fixed terms,
                                                         204
but most serve for longer than just one year.                  Many clerks are either
concurrently enrolled in domestic Ph.D. programs or preparing to apply
for Ph.D. programs overseas. It is up to each justice how to select his or
her clerk, but an LL.M. is a de facto hiring requirement, and many of the
clerks receive part or all of their graduate-level legal training overseas.
In addition, some justices prefer to hire clerks with strength in a
particular language, typically either English or German, that will be
                                      205
helpful for research purposes.              The clerks, in turn, rely heavily upon
one another, thanks in part to the fact that they complement each other
with different language skills and foreign legal expertise. Research on
foreign law is now conducted “mostly” on the Internet and through
online research services such as Westlaw and its German equivalent,
                 206
Beck Online.


      proportion of scholars with an interest and some expertise in comparative law”).
203 See infra Table 1 (summarizing the extent to which constitutional law professors at
    elite law schools in Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and the United States
    possess foreign legal training).
204 For example, one justice had four different clerks over the course of seven years,
    which is a fairly typical level of turnover.
205 Of the justices who make a point of hiring clerks with particular linguistic aptitudes,
    some seek out clerks who can compensate for their own weakness in a particular
    language, while others prefer clerks who share the same linguistic strengths as they
    do, in order to help them research the law of countries that they already tend to
    consult most frequently.
206 The TCC has librarians who do not help with substantive foreign legal research but
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                         119
                Approach to Comparativism

      The litigants themselves are of limited use in helping the justices to
                                                                             207
learn about relevant foreign law. Most petitioners are pro se,                     and the
few lawyers who do appear tend to be inexperienced at making
                                                                                        208
constitutional arguments of any kind, much less comparative ones.
However, if the justices feel that they need more information on a
particular topic, they may convene an unofficial information-gathering
session (shuo ming hui) at which academics will discuss the topic and
                                                    209
explain relevant foreign jurisprudence.                   These sessions serve as a
functional substitute for both oral argument (which occurs only in
                     210
“extreme cases”)           and amicus curiae briefing (which is not “against
                                              211
the rules” but “not the habit” either)              but double as a mechanism for
learning about foreign law. Perhaps twice a year, the TCC will also
invite foreign scholars, most frequently from Germany, to conduct
                                                    212
informational seminars with the justices.


    will acquire foreign law books upon request. See Interview with Clerk 2, supra note 184.
207 See Interview with Justice B, supra note 183.
208 See id. (characterizing the briefs filed by attorneys with the TCC as weak); Interview
    with Clerk 1, supra note 189 (describing the quality of briefs filed with the TCC as
    “poor” and reflective of a lack of experience with constitutional litigation, but noting
    that test cases are occasionally brought on a pro bono basis by Lee & Li, a large law
    firm with superior resources); Interview with Clerk 2, supra note 184 (concurring in
    Clerk 1’s assessment); Interview with Chien-Feng Wei, Attorney, in Taipei, Taiwan
    (Nov. 24, 2010) (estimating that no more than five or six attorneys in all of Taiwan
    regularly litigate constitutional cases, and indicating that he personally brings one or
    two cases before the TCC per year); Interview with Nigel Li, Partner, Lee & Li, in
    Taipei, Taiwan (Nov. 24, 2010) (concurring that very few attorneys in Taiwan
    regularly litigate constitutional cases, and indicating that he personally handles
    roughly ten to twelve cases per year that result in petitions to the TCC).
209 See Interview with Justice B, supra note 183; see also Saunders, supra note 11, at
    579 (noting the TCC’s practice of holding “expert meetings in which scholars give
    their views on aspects of comparative constitutional experience”).
210 Interview with Justice B, supra note 183.
211 Id.
212 Interview with Admin. Official, Constitutional Court of the Republic of China, in
    Taipei, Taiwan (Nov. 25, 2010).
120                                                《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



      E. Level of Interaction with Foreign Courts
       The TCC’s opportunities for engagement with foreign courts are
severely constrained. In a globalized world, the TCC is a rarity: it has
been cut off from regular interaction with other courts. The TCC has
                                                                    213
become a “natural experiment in judicial isolation”                       due to mainland
China’s largely successful efforts to isolate Taiwan from the international
community.

       The dwindling handful of countries with which Taiwan still enjoys
                         214
diplomatic relations           are the few remaining places in the world where
the Justices of the Constitutional Court can expect a red-carpet welcome.
South Africa under apartheid was one such country; visiting members of
the TCC attended a party in their honor with members of the South
African Constitutional Court and were even treated to a tour of the
           215
country.         Today, the members of the TCC can still look forward to a
warm welcome if they visit Panama or Burkina Faso. But such
hospitality is disappearing in tandem with Taiwan’s diplomatic relations.

       Membership in international organizations also poses challenges for
the TCC and its justices. A case in point is the Korean-instigated
formation of the AACC, discussed above in Section III.E. A member of
the KCC invited the TCC to apply for membership, but after some
internal discussion, the TCC decided not to apply, partly for fear of the
potential “embarrassment” that might result if China were subsequently


213 See Law & Chang, supra note 11, at 527, 538.
214 Taiwan has official diplomatic ties with only twenty-three countries. See id. at 540 n. 66.
215 See Interview with Justice E, Current or Former Member of the Constitutional Court
      of the Republic of China, in Taipei, Taiwan (Dec. 3, 2010); Interview with Justice D,
      Current or Former Member of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of China, in
      Taipei, Taiwan (Nov. 26, 2010).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                         121
                Approach to Comparativism

                         216
asked to participate.          A number of justices expressed concern that if
the TCC were to join first (under its proper name, the “Constitutional
Court of the Republic of China”) and then China were to join
subsequently, China might insist that the TCC be forced to participate
under a different name or ejected from the organization entirely — a
                                              217
possibility that they wished to avoid.

      Participation      in    international        conferences     can       be   equally
problematic. The website for the second congress of the WCCJ held in
2011 in Rio de Janeiro, for example, boasted the sponsorship of the
Venice Commission and the participation of no less than eighty-eight
                                                                        218
constitutional courts and ten regional court associations.                    Yet no one
                                  219
from the TCC was invited.               Nor were the Taiwanese welcome when
their Korean neighbors hosted an even larger number of courts at the
                                220
third congress in 2014.               In some cases, Taiwanese judges have
literally been turned away at the border, as occurred in 1983 when the


216 See Interview with Justice A, Current or Former Member of the Constitutional Court
    of the Republic of China, in Taipei, Taiwan (Dec. 18, 2010); Interview with Justice I,
    supra note 184; Interview with Judicial Admin., in Taipei, Taiwan (Nov. 25, 2010).
    The justices were also aware that Japan had already decided not to join, although its
    reasons for declining were not known.
217 Ultimately, neither Taiwan nor China joined the association.
218 See 2ND CONGRESS OF THE WORLD CONFERENCE ON CONSTITUTIONAL JUSTICE, LIST
    OF PARTICIPANTS (2011), available at http://www.venice.coe.int/WCCJ/Rio/WCCJ_
    List_of_Participants.pdf (listing the representatives of the eighty-eight constitutional
    courts and ten regional court associations that participated in the January 2011
    meeting hosted in Rio de Janeiro by the Federal Supreme Court of Brazil and
    sponsored by the Venice Commission).
219 See E-mail from Justice A, Current or Former Justice of the Constitutional Court of
    the Republic of China, to author (Feb. 27, 2011, 09:31 PST) (on file with author); E-
    mail from Justice H, Current or Former Justice of the Constitutional Court of the
    Republic of China, to author (Mar. 1, 2011, 04:16 PST) (on file with author).
220 See supra notes 176-180 and accompanying text (noting both the magnitude of the
    event and the exclusion of the TCC).
122                                              《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯


                                                              221
International Association of Judges met in Egypt                    and again in 2004 at
the biennial meeting of the International Association of Women Judges
                    222
held in Uganda.

      Efforts by members of the TCC to visit constitutional courts in
other countries have also been frustrated by Chinese interference. The
justices ordinarily receive a travel budget that enables them to visit
foreign courts for research purposes; the choice of destination is left to
them, and in a typical year, a group of three or four justices will make
use of the summer recess to visit a constitutional court that they find of
                                                        223
particular interest or relevance to their work.               Some countries, such as
             224               225               226                             227
Australia,         Germany,          Hungary,          and South Korea,                were
identified as relatively hospitable and trouble-free destinations, at least
for a fortunate few justices. Other countries, however, have resorted to
face-saving avoidance techniques. The justices may be told, for example,
that a visit to France’s Conseil Constitutionnel requires approval by the
                                     228
Ministry of Foreign Affairs,               or that the officials needed to authorize
                                                                    229
passage through France happen to be on vacation.                          Similar episodes
                                           230
have occurred in Italy and Spain.


221 Interview with Justice E, supra note 215.
222 According to a justice who attempted to attend the conference, the Taiwanese judges
    were denied entry visas by Uganda because China had offered to fund construction
    of a new building for the judiciary and had made clear its desire that the Taiwanese
    delegation be barred from attending. Interview with Justice I, supra note 184.
223 Interview with Justice B, supra note 183; Interview with Clerk 2, supra note 184.
224 Interview with Justice I, supra note 184; Interview with Judicial Admin., supra note 216.
225 Interview with Justice C, supra note 186.
226 Interview with Justice B, supra note 183.
227 Interview with Clerk 2, supra note 184 (describing an official reception held at the
    South Korean Constitutional Court for visitors from the TCC).
228 See Interview with Judicial Admin., supra note 216.
229 See Law & Chang, supra note 11, at 556; Interview with Justice C, supra note 186.
230 See Law & Chang, supra note 11, at 556-57.
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                     123
                Approach to Comparativism

     Nor are countries with close historical or political ties to Taiwan
necessarily more receptive to Taiwanese visitors. Notwithstanding
Japan’s primary responsibility for shaping Taiwan’s current legal system
over five decades of colonial rule, Japanese judges and officials were
described as “generally unwilling to meet” with Taiwanese visitors and
more concerned with the state of their relations with China than with
                            231
their former colony.              The fact that some Taiwanese judges have
studied in Japan and are personally acquainted with Japanese judges
means that judge-to-judge contact remains possible, at least on an
                                    232
unofficial, individual basis.             However, if official visitors from the
TCC are received at the Japanese Supreme Court at all, it is generally by
                                                            233
administrative officials or, at best, retired justices.

     As difficult as it can be for Taiwan’s judges to attend international
meetings or visit courts in other countries, playing the part of host can
pose even greater challenges. Inviting distinguished judges from other
                                                                                   234
countries to Taiwan is, in the words of one TCC justice, “very hard.”
The President of the German Bundesverfassungsgericht, for example,
indicated with regret that it would be “difficult” for political reasons to
                                            235
accept an invitation from the TCC,                and a number of justices reported
that their success in inviting German constitutional jurists had been
                      236
limited to retirees.         On this count, the members of the United States
Supreme Court have proved braver: Justices O’Connor, Kennedy, and


231 See Interview with Judicial Admin., supra note 216.
232 See id.
233 See Interview with Clerk 8, supra note 186; Interview with Clerk 2, supra note 184.
234 Interview with Justice B, supra note 183.
235 Interview with Clerk 3, supra note 186.
236 See, e.g., Interview with Justice J, Current or Former Member of the Constitutional
    Court of the Republic of China, in Taipei, Taiwan (Dec. 30, 2010); Interview with
    Judicial Admin., supra note 216.
124                                                 《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯


                                            237
Scalia have all visited the TCC.                  Even when dealing with the U.S.
Supreme Court, however, Taiwan’s justices are wary of extending
                                                                                 238
official invitations for fear that they are more likely to be rebuffed.

       The TCC’s ties to the outside world are bolstered to some extent by
the fact that the former law professors on the court possess their own
international network of academic connections, but the use of these
                                                  239
contacts does not always bear fruit.                    The effectiveness of academic
backchannels is limited, moreover, by Chinese efforts to thwart the
participation of Taiwanese law professors in foreign conferences and
private scholarly organizations, as exemplified by the expulsion of
Taiwan’s national association of constitutional law professors from the
                                                                         240
International Association of Constitutional Law in 1999.

       Finally, even when there are no political barriers to Taiwanese
participation, a small country such as Taiwan is inherently easy for the
organizers of international gatherings to overlook or ignore. A case in
point is Yale Law School’s oft-noted global constitutionalism seminar,
now entering its third decade, which brings together constitutional
judges from around the world on an invitation-only basis for closed-door
                241
discussions.          On only one occasion — in 1997 — has a member of the



237 See Interview with Justice B, supra note 183.
238 See id. (offering by way of example the use of a Harvard professor as a go-between
      in an ultimately unsuccessful effort to bring Justice Souter to Taipei).
239 See Law & Chang, supra note 11, at 556 (describing unsuccessful overtures made
    through academic channels to arrange meetings with members of the Italian and
    Spanish Constitutional Courts).
240 See id. at 550-52.
241 See, e.g., SLAUGHTER, supra note 12, at 98 (citing the Yale Law School seminar as a
    forum for global judicial dialogue); Alford, supra note 19, at 669 (same);
    McCrudden, supra note 6, at 511 (same).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                         125
                Approach to Comparativism

TCC participated, and sources on the TCC could identify only one other
justice who has ever been invited.



V. THE HONG KONG COURT OF FINAL APPEAL

     A. Level of Foreign Law Citation
      Citations to foreign law are a staple of HKCFA opinions. Indeed,
the court cites foreign law more often than it cites domestic law. In cases
involving constitutional rights, fully three-quarters of its case citations
                                                       242
are to foreign and international courts,                      while one-third of its
                                                        243
legislative citations are to foreign legislation.

     B. Level of Foreign Law Usage
      As its citations demonstrate, the HKCFA routinely gives serious
consideration to foreign law. Once discovered, relevant foreign case law
is unlikely to be ignored without explanation or acknowledgment. If the
HKCFA were to learn of a Canadian appellate decision on point, for
example, the justices would consider themselves entirely free to take a
                                                                                        244
different approach but would also feel a “need to explain why.”
Moreover, any usage of foreign law is likely to be explicitly disclosed.




242 Simon N.M. Young, Constitutional Rights in Hong Kong’s Court of Final Appeal, 27
    CHINESE (TAIWAN) Y.B. INT’L L. & AFF. 67, 82 tbl.10 (2011) (analyzing all of the
    HKCFA’s constitutional decisions over the first ten years of the court’s existence, from
    1999 to 2009).
243 Id. at 82 tbl.11.
244 See Interview with Justice B, Permanent or Non-Permanent Justice of the H.K. Court
    of Final Appeal, in H.K. ( June 6, 2014).
126                                                《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



       The differences between common law and civil law courts help to
explain why the HKCFA is more transparent in its usage of foreign law
than the JSC, KCC, or TCC. First, like other common law courts, the
HKCFA issues opinions that are heavily laden with citations and thus
offer an inherently more complete picture of the authorities
               245
considered.          Second, the values of the adversarial system weigh in
favor of disclosing foreign law usage. In the words of one justice,
“fundamental fairness” requires that the parties have an opportunity to
                                                                      246
respond to any foreign cases that the court has in mind.                    Consequently,
the HKCFA aims for “full disclosure” of all authorities considered as
                  247
well as cited.          Any foreign authorities that the court considers but
ultimately does not cite are supposed to be included in the “list of
                                                                      248
authorities not cited” that accompanies each decision.                      This practice
of full disclosure does not preclude “the odd footnote reference” to a
previously undisclosed foreign decision for the purpose of reinforcing a
                                                   249
point already established by other cases.                If, however, the substance of
the decision relies on a foreign case, the court will “ask the parties if
                                             250
they have anything to say” about it.

       A combination of legal and normative factors are highly conducive
to judicial comparativism in Hong Kong. From a legal perspective,
various provisions of Hong Kong’s Basic Law contemplate or require


245 See supra notes 50-52 and accompanying text (contrasting the approaches of
      common law and civil law courts to the citation of case law).
246 Interview with Justice A, Permanent or Non-Permanent Justice of the H.K. Court of
      Final Appeal, in H.K. (June 6, 2014); accord Interview with Justice B, supra note 244.
247 Interview with Justice A, supra note 246; accord Interview with Justice B, supra
      note 244.
248 See Interview with Justice A, supra note 246; Interview with Justice B, supra note 244.
249 Interview with Justice A, supra note 246.
250 Id.
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                        127
                Approach to Comparativism

judicial comparativism of some form. Notwithstanding the fact that
China is not a common law country, article 84 expressly authorizes
Hong Kong courts to “refer to precedents of other common law
                 251
jurisdictions,”         while article 8 provides that the “laws previously in
force in Hong Kong,” including “the common law,” “shall be
               252
maintained.”           The Basic Law also obligates Hong Kong courts to
apply international human rights law: article 39 constitutionally
entrenches the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR), the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural
                                                                               253
Rights (ICESCR), and “international labour conventions.”                             The
content of the ICCPR is further incorporated into domestic law by the
                                                     254
1991 Hong Kong Bill of Rights Ordinance.

      At the same time, Hong Kong’s status as an autonomous “Special
Administrative Region” of China blunts some of the normative
criticisms commonly leveled elsewhere against comparativism. First, it
makes little sense to object in the context of Hong Kong that judicial
                                                               255
comparativism compromises national sovereignty.                      The whole point

251 XIANGGANG JIBEN FA art. 84 (H.K.).
252 Id. art. 8.
253 Id. art. 39.
254 Hong Kong Bill of Rights Ordinance, (1997) Cap. 383; see Lam Siu Po v. Comm’r
    of Police, [2009] 12 H.K.C.F.A.R. 237, 250C-D (C.F.A.) (H.K.) (opinion of Bokhary,
    J.) (observing that the Bill of Rights Ordinance is “taken almost verbatim” from the
    ICCPR); GITTINGS, supra note 66, at 275 (noting that the Bill of Rights Ordinance is
    “almost a carbon copy of the rights listed in the ICCPR”).
255 See, e.g., H.R. Res. 568, 108th Cong. (2004) (asserting that “inappropriate judicial
    reliance on foreign judgments, laws, or pronouncments [sic] threatens the
    sovereignty of the United States”); ROBERT H. BORK, COERCING VIRTUE: THE
    WORLDWIDE RULE OF JUDGES 16 (rev. & expanded ed. 2003) (“By creating
    international law [the cosmopolitan left] hopes not only to outflank American
    legislatures and courts but to have liberal views adopted at a different level and then
    imposed on the United States.”); Kenneth Anderson, Squaring the Circle?
    Reconciling Sovereignty and Global Governance Through Global Government
128                                               《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



of Hong Kong’s unique constitutional scheme, which was built upon
formal guarantees of autonomy negotiated between China and the
United Kingdom, is to insulate Hong Kong from the full exercise of
                           256
Chinese sovereignty.             The authority of the Hong Kong judiciary to
make continuing use of foreign and international law is an important
ingredient of Hong Kong’s precious autonomy. Thus, even assuming
arguendo that judicial comparativism compromises national sovereignty,
that may be cause for celebration rather than criticism in Hong Kong.

      Second, Hong Kong’s unusual circumstances also defeat the
criticism that comparativism invites judicial activism by expanding the
                                                                                         257
range of materials that can be used to justify the invalidation of laws.


    Networks, 118 HARV. L. REV. 1255, 1303-10 (2005) (book review) (critically
    evaluating the use of foreign law in constitutional interpretation from the perspective
    of “democratic sovereignty,” and arguing that “the invocation of foreign
    constitutional law... is fundamentally at odds with democratic constitutional self-
    government”); Mark Tushnet, Transnational/Domestic Constitutional Law, 37 LOY.
    L.A. L. REV. 239, 261-63 (2003) (noting that concerns about the impairment of
    sovereignty are a recurring theme of “criticisms of the use of non-U.S. law as a rule
    of decision,” and arguing that such concerns are not valid).
256 See supra notes 64-65 and accompanying text (discussing the Sino–British Joint
    Declaration and its consequences for Hong Kong’s Basic Law).
257 See, e.g., BORK, supra note 255, at 137-38 (deeming it “illegitimate” for courts to
    “seek guidance” from foreign courts then insist that “legislatures obey” their
    decisions, and criticizing comparativism as a form of judicial activism that turns
    judicial review into a “launching pad[]” for the preferred reforms of cosmopolitan
    liberals); Alford, supra note 19, at 680 (“One wonders whether a new Supreme
    Court nominee can openly embrace [comparativism] and not risk the dreaded label
    of a judicial activist.”); Michael D. Ramsey, International Materials and Domestic
    Rights: Reflections on Atkins and Lawrence, 98 AM. J. INT’L L. 69, 69 (2004) (“The
    most trenchant critique of [judicial] use of international materials is that it serves as
    mere cover for the expansion of selected rights favored by domestic advocacy
    groups....”).
    Whether comparativism actually leads to judicial activism in the form of more
    frequent invalidation of laws is questionable. See Alford, supra note 19, at 675-76
    (demonstrating with examples that “[t]he Court frequently has relied on foreign
    authority” to uphold restrictions on individual liberties, and predicting that “the
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                        129
                Approach to Comparativism

Such criticisms rest upon the premise that judicial activism is illicit
because it entails lawmaking by unelected judges at the expense of
                                            258
democratic lawmaking processes.                   In the context of Hong Kong,
however, it is difficult to object to judicial invalidation of government
action as undemocratic or countermajoritarian because Hong Kong’s
legislature and chief executive are not fully elected but instead chosen
pursuant to a convoluted formula designed to ensure compliance with
                     259
Beijing’s wishes.          The acts of pseudo-elected officials on behalf of an
authoritarian regime do not exactly cry out for judicial deference in the
name of democracy. Indeed, far from undermining democratic self-
governance, vigorous judicial review might be said to operate as a partial
substitute for democratic governance by keeping Hong Kong’s
government within the kinds of legal limits that are prevalent in
democratic countries, and by giving the people of Hong Kong a reliable
and transparent mechanism for challenging government actions that
affect them.


    Court will continue to receive invitations to reference foreign experiences in order to
    uphold government restrictions on individual freedoms or curtail the expansion of
    rights”); Ramsey, supra, at 76 (“[T]here is nothing necessarily rights enhancing
    about international materials. In many areas, it seems likely that the United States is
    an outlier in protecting rights that few other societies recognize.”).
258 See David S. Law, A Theory of Judicial Power and Judicial Review, 97 GEO. L.J.
    723, 727-30 (2009) (noting the preoccupation of American constitutional theory with
    the extent to which the supposedly “counter-majoritarian” character of judicial
    review necessitates judicial restraint, and reviewing empirical scholarship that casts
    doubt on the extent to which judicial review is actually countermajoritarian).
259 See Albert H.Y. Chen, International Human Rights Law and Domestic Constitutional
    Law: Internationalisation of Constitutional Law in Hong Kong, 4 NAT’L TAIWAN U.
    L. REV. 237, 273 (2009) (observing that the existence of a “democracy deficit” in
    Hong Kong makes it impossible to object to judicial use of international law on
    democratic grounds); supra notes 64-67 and accompanying text (describing the
    selection of the chief executive and half of the members of the legislature in ways
    that favor constituencies sympathetic to China and give Beijing an effective veto
    over the selection of candidates).
130                                              《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



      C. Jurisdictions Considered
      The HKCFA relies most frequently on case law from the United
Kingdom. Roughly half of the case citations found in the HKCFA’s
                                                                       260
constitutional rights jurisprudence are to British cases.                     Indeed, the
HKCFA cites cases from the United Kingdom with much greater
frequency than its own case law: whereas 48% of all citations are to case
law from the United Kingdom, only 11% are to the HKCFA’s own
                 261
jurisprudence.         Other popular jurisdictions include Canada and the
                                                                                 262
United States, which together account for 9% of case citations,                        and
Australia and New Zealand, which collectively lay claim to 7%.
Especially in the case of American case law, however, the fact that cases
                                                                        263
are cited does not necessarily mean that they are followed.


260 Young, supra note 242, at 82 tbl.10.
261 Id.; see also Andrew Byrnes, A Framework for the Comparative Analysis of Bills of
    Rights (“The courts of Hong Kong manifest an excessive reliance on, and deference
    to, English decisions at almost every level; they tend to follow, almost automatically,
    developments in England and have considerably less time for developments
    elsewhere in the common law world.”), in PROMOTING HUMAN RIGHTS THROUGH
    BILLS OF RIGHTS: COMPARATIVE PERSPECTIVES 318, 355 (Philip Alston ed., 1999).
262 Young, supra note 242, at 82 tbl.10; see also Johannes M.M. Chan, Hong Kong’s Bill
    of Rights: Its Reception of and Contribution to International and Comparative
    Jurisprudence, 47 INT’L & COMP. L.Q. 306, 309-10 (1998) (noting that, in
    interpreting Hong Kong’s Bill of Rights Ordinance, Hong Kong courts have made
    “few references to comparative jurisprudence from jurisdictions other than Canada
    or the United States,” with the exceptions of the European Court of Human Rights
    and the British Privy Council).
263 See Chan, supra note 262, at 310 (observing that the relatively few citations to cases
    from the United States tend to be made “with reservations”); Young, supra note 242,
    at 82 (noting that constitutional cases from Canada and the United States are “often
    considered” but “not always followed”); cf. Byrnes, supra note 261, at 368-69
    (reporting that Hong Kong courts “have felt particularly comfortable in dealing with
    decisions under the Canadian Charter” of Rights and Freedoms when asked to
    interpret the Hong Kong Bill of Rights, and that Canadian judicial decisions tend to
    be both more accessible and more familiar to Hong Kong counsel than American
    decisions).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                      131
                Approach to Comparativism

     Although it receives fewer citations than the British courts, the
ECtHR may be more influential than the raw citation numbers would
suggest. International courts and tribunals such as the ECtHR account
                                                     264
for only 8% of the HKCFA’s case citations,                 but scholars and judges
alike have observed that the jurisprudence of the ECtHR tends to receive
                                                       265
serious consideration from Hong Kong courts.

     D. Level of Foreign Law Expertise
     Legal and normative factors of the type mentioned in Section V.B
help to explain why the HKCFA might be especially willing to use
foreign and international law. They do not, however, directly explain the
court’s high level of foreign law expertise or ability to perform foreign
legal research. A variety of institutional factors contribute to the
HKCFA’s heavy capacity for comparativism as well as its taste for
British law in particular. These factors include: (1) the entrenchment of
the legal system inherited from the United Kingdom; (2) the direct
participation of overseas judges and lawyers in the work of the HKCFA;
(3) the extent to which local judges and lawyers are educated in the
United Kingdom; and (4) the potential for assistance with foreign legal
research through the relatively new system of judicial assistants.



264 Young, supra note 242, at 82 tbl.10.
265 See Chan, supra note 262, at 309 (reporting that Hong Kong courts make “extensive
    reference” to ECtHR case law when interpreting the Bill of Rights Ordinance); Young,
    supra note 242, at 82 (describing the ECtHR as “[p]robably the most influential
    source” of foreign case law); Interview with Justice A, Permanent or Non-Permanent
    Justice of the H.K. Court of Final Appeal, in H.K. (May 4, 2014) (opining that Hong
    Kong courts may be more willing to cite ECtHR jurisprudence than the
    jurisprudence of most foreign courts); Interview with Judge 1, Current or Former
    Judge of the High Court of the H.K. Special Administrative Region, in H.K. (May 4,
    2014) (same).
132                                             《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



      1. The Entrenched Legacy of British Rule

      An understanding of the HKCFA’s heavy expertise in foreign law,
and British law in particular, requires at least some background
knowledge of Hong Kong’s history and relationship with mainland
China. From the mid-1800s until China’s resumption of sovereignty in
                                                   266
1997, Hong Kong was a British colony,                    and the Privy Council in
                                                          267
London served accordingly as its highest court.                  The establishment of
the HKCFA in 1997 to replace the Privy Council as Hong Kong’s
                                                         268
highest court was ordained by the Basic Law,                    which is technically a
statute enacted by the National People’s Congress of the People’s
Republic of China (PRC) but functions as a constitution for the semi-
                                                                                     269
autonomous Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR).
Both the existence and the content of the Basic Law reflect the terms of
the Sino–British Joint Declaration, the treaty under which the United
Kingdom returned sovereignty over Hong Kong to China in exchange
for guarantees that Hong Kong would continue to enjoy a high degree of
                                      270
autonomy in its internal affairs.

      Several provisions of the Basic Law guarantee the continuity of
Britain’s legal legacy in Hong Kong notwithstanding the resumption of
Chinese sovereignty. As previously noted, article 8 preserves “[t]he laws


266 See GITTINGS, supra note 66, at 10. While the southern portion of Hong Kong was
    originally ceded by China to Britain in perpetuity, the northern portion was instead
    leased for ninety-nine years. See id.
267 See id. at 5.
268 XIANGGANG JIBEN FA art. 81 (H.K.).
269 See GITTINGS, supra note 66, at 46-50 (explaining why, notwithstanding objections
    from mainland Chinese officials and scholars, the Basic Law “fits the definition of a
    constitution” and is consequently “commonly referred to in Hong Kong” as a “mini-
    constitution”).
270 See supra note 64 and accompanying text.
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                          133
                Approach to Comparativism

previously in force in Hong Kong” under British colonial rule — namely,
“the common law, rules of equity, ordinances, subordinate legislation
                          271
and customary law,”             while article 87 expressly obligates courts in
                                                                 272
Hong Kong to apply that preexisting body of law.                       Because Hong
Kong is now part of China, judicial application of the “laws previously
in force in Hong Kong” and “the common law” involves the application
of what is now technically foreign law.

      Judging from the frequency of citation to British law as well as the
accounts given by judges themselves, the Hong Kong judiciary has
                                                                            273
succeeded at maintaining the continuity of the legal system.                      It is a
mark of this continuity that Hong Kong judges — most of whom
received their legal training in the United Kingdom — do not necessarily
conceptualize British law as foreign. When asked why Hong Kong courts
make such heavy use of foreign law, one justice responded that he did
not think of English or Australian cases as foreign law but rather as simply
“the common law,” a system of principles and reasoning that transcends
                                                              274
national boundaries and encompasses Hong Kong.                      It is necessary to
consider English and Australian cases, he explained, because one
determines “whether one is right” by “comparing conclusions reached
                                                                                  275
by other judges applying the same system of law in similar cases.”



271 XIANGGANG JIBEN FA art. 8 (H.K.).
272 Id. art. 87.
273 One member of the HKCFA recalled the experience of conducting a trial that spanned
    the days immediately before and after the British handover of Hong Kong to China.
    He noticed only one change between June 30, 1997 (the last day of British rule), and
    July 1, 1997 (the first day of Chinese rule): the royal coat of arms in the courtroom
    had been replaced by the red bauhinia seal of the Hong Kong Special Administrative
    Region. See Interview with Justice A, supra note 265.
274 Interview with Justice B, supra note 244.
275 Id.
134                                               《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



      2. Participation of Overseas Judges and Lawyers

       Articles 82 and 84 of the Basic Law explicitly authorize the
                                                                                  276
recruitment of judges “from other common law jurisdictions,”                            while
article 94 does the same for the legal profession by allowing the
licensing of “lawyers from outside Hong Kong to work and practise in
                 277
the Region.”           The ostensible rationale for allowing foreign judges to
serve on the HKCFA was not to increase the court’s aptitude for
comparativism, but rather to compensate for the lack of experience with
                                                              278
final appellate courts among Hong Kong judges.                      Whatever the reason
for their inclusion, however, one would be hard-pressed to imagine a
more efficient and effective way to ensure foreign legal expertise on a
court than to appoint foreign judges.
                                                                            279
       The HKCFA hears appeals in five-judge panels                                but has
historically had only four permanent members, including the Chief
          280
Justice.        By statute, the fifth justice is selected by the Chief Justice
                                                                          281
from a roster of local and foreign non-permanent judges.                        The list of


276 XIANGGANG JIBEN FA art. 82 (H.K.). Within the judiciary, only the Chief Justice of the
      HKCFA and the Chief Judge of the High Court must be Chinese citizens. Id. art. 90.
277 Id. art. 94.
278 See GITTINGS, supra note 66, at 189.
279 Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal Ordinance, (1997) Cap. 484, 5, § 16 (H.K.).
      Applications for leave to appeal are decided by three-judge panels. Id. § 18.
280 By statute, the minimum number of permanent justices (including the Chief Justice)
    is four, but nothing in the statute appears to preclude the appointment of more than
    four permanent justices. Id. § 5(1),(5). In practice, the HKCFA has not had more than
    four permanent justices at a time.
281 Id. §§ 9, 16. Like the permanent justices, the local and foreign “non-permanent”
    justices are appointed by Hong Kong’s Chief Executive on the recommendation of a
    judicial nominating commission. Whereas permanent justices serve until retirement
    age (at which point they may be renewed for a limited period of time), non-
    permanent justices face no retirement age and serve exclusively for fixed, renewable
    terms. Id. §§ 7-9.
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                         135
                Approach to Comparativism

non-permanent judges consists primarily of retired members of the
HKCFA itself, while the list of foreign judges is drawn exclusively
                                                     282
“from other common law jurisdictions.”                     It is unnecessary for the
foreign judges to possess prior exposure to Hong Kong law; indeed,
anyone who possesses prior experience as a lower court judge in Hong
                                                                   283
Kong is ineligible for appointment as a foreign judge.

      In practice, the Chief Justice ordinarily chooses a visiting foreign
                                      284
judge to occupy the last seat.              The majority of these foreign judges
have hailed from the United Kingdom, with Australia and New Zealand
                               285
providing the remainder.             In all forty-five of the constitutional cases
decided by the HKCFA through 2009, the permanent judges of the court
were joined by a former or sitting member of the United Kingdom’s
                                                                           286
House of Lords, Privy Council, or Australian High Court.                         Thus far,


282 Id. §§ 5(3), 9.
283 See id. at 4, § 12(4) (deeming ineligible for appointment as a “judge from another
    common law jurisdiction” anyone who has ever been “a judge of the High Court, a
    District Judge or a permanent magistrate, in Hong Kong”).
284 See Young, supra note 242, at 81 (reporting that all 45 constitutional cases decided
    by the HKCFA through 2009 included the participation of a former or sitting
    member of the Australian High Court, the British House of Lords, or the Privy
    Council); Simon N.M. Young & Antonio Da Roza, Judges and Judging in the Court
    of Final Appeal: A Statistical Picture, H.K. LAWYER, Aug. 2010, at 1, 3, available at
    http://hub.hku.hk/bitstream/10722/129553/1/HKLawyer-JudgesJudging-Aug2010.pdf
    (reporting that an overseas judge participated in 97% of all cases heard by the
    HKCFA from its creation in 1997 through 2010).
285 See Young, supra note 242, at 79, 80 tbl.9 (listing the overseas judges who
    participated in the HKCFA’s constitutional cases over the first ten years of the court’s
    existence, and noting that they all hailed from the United Kingdom, Australia, and
    New Zealand). At present, the list of non-permanent justices consists of six retired
    Hong Kong judges, four retired Australian judges, one retired judge from New
    Zealand, and seven active and retired judges from the United Kingdom. See List of
    Judges and Judicial Officers (Position as at 23 February 2015), H.K. JUDICIARY,
    http://www.judiciary.gov.hk/en/organization/judges.htm (last visited Feb. 28, 2015)
    [http://perma.cc/UKB4-7BV4].
286 See Young, supra note 242, at 81.
136                                            《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



no Canadians or South Africans have served as visiting judges on the
            287
HKCFA.            One factor that contributes to the heavy representation of
British judges is the United Kingdom’s longstanding practice of allowing
                                                                                   288
its best active-duty judges to serve concurrently on overseas courts.
An extreme example is Lord Neuberger, who currently serves as a non-
permanent justice of the HKCFA as well as the chief justice of the United
                                 289
Kingdom Supreme Court.                 In practice, however, the availability of
                                                                       290
active British judges is constrained by their domestic duties.

       The tendency of parties to hire prominent foreign counsel in high-
stakes constitutional cases further exposes the HKCFA to foreign law.
By their own account, the justices “rely heavily on counsel” to bring
                                                          291
relevant foreign precedent to their attention.                  Because the most
sought-after human rights lawyers to appear before the HKCFA tend to
hail from the United Kingdom, the HKCFA can be assured of learning
                                        292
about British law at a minimum.




287 See supra note 285 (discussing the nationalities of the HKCFA’s past and present
      non-permanent justices).
288 See Interview with Johannes Chan, Dean, Univ. of H.K. Faculty of Law, in Taipei,
    Taiwan ( June 10, 2014) (identifying the United Kingdom’s historical tradition of
    dispatching personnel to assist its colonies and dominions as a reason for its
    willingness to share active judges with the HKCFA).
289 See Interview with Justice A, supra note 246; List of Judges and Judicial Officers
    (Position as at 23 February 2015), supra note 285 (listing both the permanent and
    non-permanent members of the HKCFA).
290 See Interview with Justice A, supra note 246 (noting that the HKCFA does not recess
    in August because that is the only time when the U.K. Supreme Court’s schedule
    permits Lord Neuberger to hear cases in Hong Kong).
291 See Interview with Justice A, supra note 265.
292 See Interview with Justice A, supra note 246 (citing Baron Pannick, QC and Michael
    Fordham, QC as examples).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                   137
                Approach to Comparativism

     3. The Foreign Education of Lawyers and Judges

     Until the 1970s, Hong Kong lacked either law schools of its own or
                                              293
a supply of locally trained lawyers.                Consequently, most of the
lawyers in Hong Kong with sufficient experience to be plausible
candidates for appointment to senior positions in the judiciary —
including all of the permanent justices of the HKCFA — have studied
law in the United Kingdom. Although the passage of time may
eventually bring about a predominance of locally trained judges at the
most senior levels, this has not yet come to pass.

     The fact that all of the permanent members of the HKCFA (and all
but one of its non-permanent members) received their legal education
                          294
outside Hong Kong               has helped to ensure a high level of
sophistication about foreign law. Even a gradual transition to locally
trained judges, however, seems unlikely to significantly diminish the
prevalence of foreign legal expertise on the bench given the heavily
international character of Hong Kong law schools. For example, the
members of the University of Hong Kong Faculty of Law — the oldest
of the three local law schools — hail from seventeen different countries,
and less than half are ethnically Chinese (a category that includes



293 See id. (noting that Hong Kong lacked any local law graduates prior to 1973); see
    also About Us, FACULTY OF LAW, U. H.K., http://www.law.hku.hk/faculty/index.php
    (last visited Feb. 28, 2015) [http://perma.cc/5JU9-2QDL] (indicating that the
    University of Hong Kong, home to Hong Kong’s first law school, lacked any kind of
    law department until 1969 and lacked an autonomous law school until 1978).
294 The exception is Justice Patrick Chan, who studied law at the University of Hong
    Kong and served as a permanent justice of the HKCFA until 2013, at which time he
    became a non-permanent member of the court. See Patrick Chan (Judge), WIKIPEDIA,
    http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patrick_Chan_(judge) (last visited Feb. 28, 2015)
    [http://perma.cc/35H9-7SVN].
138                                                《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯


                                                                                          295
professors from mainland China and Taiwan as well as Hong Kong).

      4. Research Assistance

       Because both the justices themselves and the lawyers who appear
before them tend to be well versed in foreign law, the HKCFA is not
reliant on its clerks for foreign legal expertise. Nevertheless, the
clerks — known as judicial assistants — do provide additional support
for the comparative enterprise.

       The use of law clerks is a relatively new phenomenon in Hong Kong.
The HKCFA hired its first judicial assistants roughly a decade ago, and
                                                   296
their responsibilities are still evolving.                As of 2016, the court expects
                                                    297
to hire a total of five judicial assistants.              Judicial assistants serve one-
                                                                                   298
year terms and do not work exclusively for individual justices.                           They
                                                                            299
spend perhaps half of their time performing legal research.

       Unless instructed otherwise, a judicial assistant is likely to approach
a research assignment by investigating both British and Hong Kong law.


295 See Interview with Johannes Chan, supra note 288 (estimating that no more than
      thirty-five to forty percent of the law school’s faculty are ethnically Chinese).
296 See Interview with Justice A, supra note 265; Interview with Judicial Assistant 1,
    Judicial Assistant to the Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal and the High Court of
    Hong Kong, in Hong Kong ( June 6, 2014); Interview with Judicial Assistant 2,
    Judicial Assistant to the Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal and the High Court of
    Hong Kong, in Hong Kong ( June 6, 2014) (describing the previous system under
    which judicial assistants rotated every three months between the High Court’s
    appellate division and the HKCFA).
297 See E-Mail from Justice A, Permanent or Non-Permanent Justice of the H.K. Court
    of Final Appeal, to author (May 11, 2015, 18:34 EST).
298 See Interview with Justice A, supra note 265; Interview with Judicial Assistant 2,
    Judicial Assistant to the Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal and the High Court of
    Hong Kong, in Hong Kong ( June 6, 2014).
299 See Interview with Justice A, supra note 246; Interview with Judicial Assistant 1,
    supra note 296 (indicating that “about half the job is legal research”).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                         139
                Approach to Comparativism

If the relevant law in those jurisdictions is unclear or conflicting,
additional jurisdictions such as Australia or Canada may also be
              300
considered.           Of the current crop of five, three have foreign law
degrees (two from England and one from Australia). However, the
committee of judges responsible for hiring the judicial assistants does
not place a premium on foreign legal expertise, and the proportion of
assistants with foreign training varies considerably from year to year.

     E. Level of Interaction with Foreign Courts
      When it comes to interaction with foreign judges, the Hong Kong
judiciary is a model of transparency and recordkeeping. Its annual report,
available in both English and Chinese from its website, lists in
chronological order every foreign visitor to the judiciary, ranging from a
“14-member delegation of the Judicial Research and Training Institute of
the Republic of Korea” to a “10-member delegation led by Mr Sherali
Rahmanov, Deputy Chairperson of the Supreme Court of the Republic of
                301
Uzbekistan.”           Likewise, the report lists visits by members of the Hong
                                                                                        302
Kong judiciary to destinations and institutions outside Hong Kong.


300 See Interview with Judicial Assistant 1, supra note 296; E-mail from Judicial
    Assistant 2, Judicial Assistant to the Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal, to author
    ( June 10, 2014, 13:01 EST) (on file with author).
301 See Hong Kong Judiciary Annual Report 2013: Highlights of Events in 2013, H.K.
    JUDICIARY, http://www.judiciary.gov.hk/en/publications/annu_rept_2013/eng/highlig
    hts.html (last updated Feb. 26, 2014) [http://perma.cc/DHS4-7X7F]. The report also
    includes aggregate statistics for the number of discrete visits and visitors in three
    separate categories, “Local,” “The Mainland,” and “Overseas,” but these overall
    figures distinguish neither between visitors to the judiciary as a whole and visitors to
    the HKCFA, nor between judicial and non-judicial visitors. See Hong Kong
    Judiciary Annual Report 2013: Number of Visits and Visitors to the Judiciary, H.K.
    JUDICIARY, http://www.judiciary.gov.hk/en/publications/annu_rept_2013/eng/visiters.
    html (last updated Feb. 26, 2014) [http://perma.cc/UA9V-YXGQ].
302 Inspection of the report reveals, for example, that on May 23, 2013, Chief Justice Ma
    delivered a talk entitled “Courage and the Law: Upholding the Dignity of the
140                                           《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



Several judges indicated that the report’s listing of interaction with
                                                       303
foreign jurists can be trusted as comprehensive.

      The HKCFA’s overall level of interaction with foreign courts and
judges can fairly be described as high. Although the report does not always
distinguish between visits to the judiciary as a whole and visits to the
HKCFA in particular, it is clear that one or more members of the HKCFA
have at least monthly in-person interaction with some combination of
foreign or mainland Chinese jurists, above and beyond what is entailed
by the inclusion of a foreign judge on every panel. Hong Kong is also
part of what has been described as an “informal circuit of judges” among
Commonwealth countries and has become—alongside England,
Australia, and New Zealand—a primary exporter of judges, “particularly
                                                                        304
to smaller jurisdictions in the Caribbean and Pacific regions.”



VI. CONVENTIONAL EXPLANATIONS FOR COMPARATIVISM

      Explanations for judicial comparativism can be divided into what
might be called “demand-side” and “supply-side” explanations. Demand-
side explanations focus on the preferences that judges have with respect



    Individual” at the University of Zurich, while on the following day, a magistrate
    judge named Lin Kam-hung attended a maritime law seminar in Shenzhen. See Hong
    Kong Judiciary Annual Report 2013: Highlights of Events in 2013, supra note 301.
303 See Interview with Justice A, supra note 246; Interview with Justice B, supra note
    244; Interview with Judge 1, Current or Former Judge of the High Court of the H.K.
    Special Administrative Region, in H.K. (June 6, 2014).
304 Simon N. M. Young, The Hong Kong Multinational Judge in Criminal Appeals
    (noting also that “Canadian and American judges do not appear to be involved” in
    this international flow of judges), in CRIMINAL APPEALS 1907-2007: ISSUES AND
    PERSPECTIVES 130, 132 (Chris Corns & Gregor Urbas eds., 2008).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                       141
                Approach to Comparativism

to comparativism (or, put differently, their demand for foreign legal
expertise). Supply-side explanations focus on the extent to which judges
possess the resources and capabilities needed to engage in comparativism
(or, in other words, the supply of foreign legal expertise available to
judges). To fully understand the occurrence of comparativism, it is
necessary to investigate both the supply and demand sides of the
equation. Judges will not engage in comparativism, or any other practice,
unless they possess both the inclination and the ability to do so.
Moreover, supply and demand cannot be discussed independently of one
another because they are interdependent. Over time, demand increases
supply by incentivizing investment in the necessary institutional
infrastructure, while supply increases demand by lowering the cost to
judges of engaging in comparativism.

      Most discussion of comparativism tends to dwell on the demand
side of the equation, to the neglect of the supply side. There is little
agreement, however, over what motivates judges to seek out foreign law.
The most conventional explanation for judicial comparativism, in the
sense of being the explanation typically offered by judges themselves,
casts judicial motivations in a flattering light: judges practice
comparativism because they believe that it enriches their knowledge and
                                                   305
thus the quality of their decisionmaking.                The explanation advanced


305 See, e.g., Bryde, supra note 11, at 296; Justice Ginsburg Interview, supra note 11, at
    819; Kirby, supra note 19, at 186; La Forest, supra note 199, at 218, 220 (“[L]ittle
    pockets of particular expertise develop in foreign courts.... [T]he use of foreign
    material affords another source, another tool for the construction of better
    judgments.... [F]rom time to time a look outward may reveal refreshing
    perspectives.”); L’Heureux-Dubé, supra note 9, at 26-27; Anthony Mason, The Place
    of Comparative Law in Developing the Jurisprudence on the Rule of Law and
    Human Rights in Hong Kong, 37 H.K. L.J. 299, 302 (2007) (“In many instances,
    relevant choices have been made, sometimes differing choices, by courts of other
142                                              《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



by opponents of comparativism posits a less noble set of judicial
preferences: judges resort to foreign law, critics argue, for the purpose of
justifying ideologically desired results that lack sufficient support in
                 306
domestic law.

      Although empirical research suggests that there is at least an
                                                      307
element of truth to the less charitable view,               scholars have identified a
much broader range of reasons why courts may develop a taste for
                   308
comparativism.           The level of judicial interest in foreign law could, for


    jurisdictions. Apart from these choices, the reasoning behind the choice may provide
    useful assistance.”); Rehnquist, supra note 14, at 412 (“[N]ow that constitutional law
    is solidly grounded in so many countries, it is time that the United States courts begin
    looking to the decisions of other constitutional courts to aid in their own deliberative
    process.”); Breyer, supra note 14. See generally Law, supra note 47, at 147
    (summarizing, with examples, “the justifications given by most judges, most of the
    time, for engaging in comparativism”).
306 See, e.g., BORK, supra note 255, at 137-38 (denouncing comparativism as a means
    by which cosmopolitan liberals advance their preferred reforms); Black et al., supra
    note 24, at 21, 43 (hypothesizing, and finding empirical evidence, that the members
    of the U.S. Supreme Court “cite transnational sources of law to prop up the logic of
    their opinions” and “create the illusion that [they are] acting with considerable
    supporting precedent” when reaching ideologically motivated decisions or
    overruling precedent); Ramsey, supra note 257, at 69 (cautioning that judicial
    comparativism can “serve[] as mere cover for the expansion of selected rights
    favored by domestic advocacy groups”).
307 See Black et al., supra note 24, at 35 (finding as an empirical matter that U.S.
    Supreme Court justices are more likely to cite “transnational law” when reaching
    decisions that they favor on ideological grounds, striking down statutes, or
    overruling precedent); Erik Voeten, Borrowing and Nonborrowing Among
    International Courts, 39 J. LEGAL STUD. 547, 567, 572 (2010) (finding that separate
    opinions by ECtHR judges that cite external legal sources “almost always argue in
    favor of a more expansive” interpretation of rights, and concluding that “the use of
    external decisions is driven in part by the individual ideologies of judges”).
308 See, e.g., HIRSCHL, supra note 11, at 21-22 (listing “globalization and increased
    inter-connectivity,” “instrumentalism,” “the importance of professional networks that
    judges operate in,” and “structural features” among the various explanations offered
    by scholars for the phenomenon of “global constitutional dialogue,” and
    emphasizing the role of “sociopolitical context” in shaping “whether and where the
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                            143
                Approach to Comparativism

example, be a function of the adequacy of domestic jurisprudence. A
court faced with a relatively sparse body of domestic jurisprudence
might use foreign law to perform a gap-filling function. This might be
the case for a relatively new court, a court confronted with regime
change (such as democratization) that fundamentally alters its own role
and calls for reexamination of its existing jurisprudence, or a court faced
                                                309
with a relatively new constitution.                   This period of jurisprudential
scarcity is likely to coincide, moreover, with a period of political and


    judicial mind travels in its search for pertinent foreign sources”); McCrudden, supra
    note 6, at 516-27 (identifying ten factors that might promote judicial comparativism
    including, inter alia, the type of political regime in which the foreign court is situated,
    and the sympathy of the audience toward foreign law references).
309 See, e.g., BOBEK, supra note 11, at 14, 42-43 (noting that “[n]ewly established or
    transforming legal systems frequently use comparative reasoning as a source of
    inspiration and external authority,” and that such use may decline once “a system
    starts believing in its own self-sufficiency”); Chen, supra note 259, at 272 (“Without
    an indigenous tradition of constitutional protection of human rights, it [has been]
    natural for Hong Kong to draw on external resources for support and guidance.”);
    Gianluca Gentili, Canada: Protecting Rights in a ‘Worldwide Rights Culture': An
    Empirical Study of the Use of Foreign Precedents by the Supreme Court of Canada
    (1982–2010) (finding empirically that, following Canada’s adoption of a new
    constitution in 1982, the Canadian Supreme Court’s “citation of foreign law declined
    between the end of the 1990s and the end of the 2000s,” and attributing this decline
    to the development of “sufficient domestic jurisprudence” and consequent reduction
    in reliance on “foreign sources”), in THE USE OF FOREIGN PRECEDENTS BY
    CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES, supra note 11, at 39, 54; Tom Ginsburg, Confucian
    Constitutionalism? The Emergence of Constitutional Review in Korea and Taiwan,
    27 L. & SOC. INQUIRY 763, 790 (2002) (“[L]egislatures in new democracies are
    typically underdeveloped and unable to carry out what might otherwise be their
    natural function of norm replacement. One would thus expect courts in democratic
    transitions to play a special role of looking abroad to transform their constitutional
    orders.”); Mason, supra note 305, at 302 (noting the “natural attraction” of
    comparative law for a “newly-established court which has not yet developed its own
    corpus of jurisprudence”); McCrudden, supra note 6, at 523-24; Saunders, supra
    note 11, at 574, 582 (noting that “[f]oreign law may lose its authority... as local
    jurisprudence develops,” and citing Germany, South Africa, and Hungary as
    examples of countries where judicial use of foreign jurisprudence has declined “as
    the local jurisprudence becomes established”).
144                                              《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



institutional flux that raises an abundance of unusually important or
                                              310
contentious constitutional questions,               which may only increase the
court’s need for authority of some kind to justify and legitimate its
            311
decisions.

      From a theoretical perspective, it is unclear whether courts in
mature legal systems will necessarily make less use of foreign law.
There are at least three distinct possibilities that point in different
directions. The first possibility might be called the substitution
hypothesis: to the extent that foreign law fills a void left by a lack of
homegrown jurisprudence that coincides with a period of heightened
need for legal authority, judicial comparativism might be expected to
decline over time as domestic law offers an increasingly adequate
                                 312
substitute for foreign law.            A second possibility might be called the


310 See, e.g., GINSBURG, supra note 63, at 30, 106-246 (observing that, “in the context of
    new democracies and political transitions,” “by definition the institutional structure
    of the political system is in a period of transition,” and chronicling the landmark
    constitutional cases faced by courts in Taiwan, Mongolia, and Korea in the aftermath
    of democratization); Shannon Ishiyama Smithey, A Tool, Not a Master: The Use of
    Foreign Case Law in Canada and South Africa, 34 COMP. POL. STUD. 1188, 1193-94
    (2001) (observing that, in the aftermath of major constitutional change, both the
    Canadian Supreme Court and South African Constitutional Court were faced with
    many “highly contentious” and “literally ‘unprecedented’” situations).
311 Cf. Smithey, supra note 310, at 1192, 1204, 1207 (hypothesizing that judges search
    more broadly for support for their opinions in the face of opposition, and finding
    consistent with this hypothesis that the Canadian Supreme Court and South African
    Constitutional Court were more likely in their early years to cite foreign law in cases
    involving novel or “particularly contentious questions,” such as those decided by a
    fractured court or involving the overturning of government action).
312 See BOBEK, supra note 11, at 14-15 (noting a decline in judicial use of foreign law in
    Germany and central European post-communist countries after an “initial boom of
    comparative inspiration,” and suggesting that the decline may be attributable to a
    growing sense of “self-sufficiency”); id. at 43 n. 12 (identifying Germany and South
    Africa as countries in which judicial references to foreign sources diminished as
    domestic law accumulated); Smithey, supra note 310, at 1199-1200, 1206 (finding in
    both Canada and South Africa a “small but significant” negative relationship
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                      145
                Approach to Comparativism

habituation hypothesis: comparativism is habit-forming and becomes
increasingly well accepted and difficult to dislodge over time. Yet
another possibility might be called the circumvention hypothesis: judges
engage in comparativism precisely because there is domestic law on
point that they wish to avoid or circumvent. When precedent stands in
the way of a court’s objectives, the court must turn elsewhere for support,
and the use of foreign law may help the court to overcome the obstacle
                            313
posed by domestic law.

      Use of foreign law can also be a way for a court to elevate its status
and promote acceptance of its decisions among domestic audiences by
                                                                             314
identifying itself with high-prestige courts and countries.                        The


    between the number of constitutional cases previously decided and the degree of
    foreign law citation in subsequent constitutional cases, but also reporting that this
    relationship failed to reach statistical significance in the case of Canada once
    additional variables were introduced into the analysis).
313 See, e.g., Black et al., supra note 24, at 35 (reporting that the Supreme Court
    becomes more likely to cite “transnational law” when it is overruling precedent or
    striking down laws).
314 See, e.g., WOJCIECH SADURSKI, CONSTITUTIONALISM AND THE ENLARGEMENT OF
    EUROPE 23 (2012) (observing that “being aligned with a prestigious and powerful
    European tribunal, endowed with a high degree of legitimacy derived from states’
    international obligations, is extremely welcome in conflict-prone and democratically
    weak domestic contexts,” and noting for example that the Hungarian Constitutional
    Court’s practice of citing ECtHR case law may advance both its domestic legitimacy
    and foreign reputation); Black et al., supra note 24, at 39 (finding empirically that
    the “transnational law” citation habits of U.S. Supreme Court justices favor “those
    countries most likely to be deemed legitimate by the American public and by
    elites”—namely, stable, democratic, wealthy, English-speaking countries); Kalb,
    supra note 11, at 440 (arguing that use of foreign jurisprudence “may allow for a
    borrowing of their perceived legitimacy by a court lacking in its own”); Law &
    Chang, supra note 11, at 570 (observing the awareness of the TCC that “following in
    the footsteps of powerful and prestigious countries” helps Taiwan to “generate badly
    needed support and acceptance among the international community”); Saunders,
    supra note 11, at 580 (suggesting that a new constitutional court may make use of
    foreign jurisprudence to “augment [its] authority” and “establish its place in the
    constitutional order”); cf. Gregory A. Caldeira, The Transmission of Legal Precedent:
146                                              《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



practice of looking to a handful of prestigious and influential countries
for guidance may be perceived not as a form of illicit judicial activism,
but rather as a constraint upon judicial discretion and thus a source of
             315
legitimacy.        Courts that need to consolidate their authority have the
most to gain from making strategic use of foreign law in this manner.
Therefore, all other things equal, relatively new courts and courts in new
or transitional democracies might be expected to engage more heavily in
                   316
comparativism.

      Our four East Asian case studies offer fresh perspective on these
hypotheses. Although the substitution hypothesis makes logical sense, it
does not appear to be the case that courts resort to comparativism only in
the absence of sufficient domestic jurisprudence. The example of
Canada is sometimes cited as support for the substitution hypothesis: it
has been argued that two or three decades of judicial experience with the
1982 Charter of Rights and Freedoms led to a decline in the Canadian
                                                                                       317
Supreme Court’s use of foreign constitutional jurisprudence.


    A Study of State Supreme Courts, 79 AM. POL. SCI. REV. 178, 189-91 (1985) (finding
    that within the United States, prestige differentials among state supreme courts are a
    significant predictor of “intercourt communication,” measured in terms of the degree
    to which one state supreme court cites another).
315 Cf. Kalb, supra note 11, at 439-41 (arguing that strategic judicial citation of foreign
    law in transitional democracies can have the effect of legitimating courts and
    bolstering judicial independence); Carlos F. Rosenkrantz, Against Borrowings and
    Other Nonauthoritative Uses of Foreign Law, 1 INT’L J. CONST. L. 269, 273 (2003)
    (citing the argument made by Domingo Sarmiento, future president of Argentina,
    that Argentinian courts ought to adhere strictly to American constitutional precedent
    in order to ensure that their case law does not simply reflect personal opinion);
    Voeten, supra note 307, at 553 (“Citing external sources... signals that legal
    reasoning is shared by others and thus is not arbitrary.”).
316 See Kalb, supra note 11, at 448.
317 See HIRSCHL, supra note 11, at 33-34 (reviewing evidence of a “jurisprudential
    maturation” effect in Canada, Hong Kong, and India); Gentili, supra note 309, at 54
    (attributing a decline in the Canadian Supreme Court’s citation of foreign law to the
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                      147
                Approach to Comparativism

However, nearly as much time has elapsed in South Korea and Taiwan
since democratization and the emergence of vigorous judicial review, yet
the accumulation of over a quarter-century of domestic jurisprudence
does not appear to have curtailed the practice of comparativism by either
the KCC or TCC. Thus, at least for Korea and Taiwan, the habituation
and circumvention hypotheses are more consistent with the evidence
than the substitution hypothesis. It may be that the substitution
hypothesis is neither always true nor always false but instead turns at
least partly on institutional factors that vary from court to court. For
example, substitution of domestic for foreign jurisprudence may be less
likely if a court has the time and resources to conduct both foreign and
domestic legal research and thus is not forced to choose one at the
expense of the other. The KCC, at least, fits this description.

      It is also clear from the case studies that many judges value
comparativism as a means of enhancing rather than undermining the
legitimacy of judicial review. Whereas constitutional comparativism has
                                                        318
attracted fierce criticism in the United States,              popular reaction may
actually encourage the use of foreign law in places such as Korea,
Taiwan, and Hong Kong. As a member of the TCC noted, the ability to
say “this is how it’s done elsewhere” and “we used a foreign mainstream


    growing availability of domestic precedent); Smithey, supra note 310, at 1199-1200,
    1206 (finding evidence that foreign law citation in Canada and South Africa
    decreased as domestic precedent increased). But see Harding, supra note 16, at 411-
    12 (arguing that “the Supreme Court of Canada’s use of foreign law has not
    diminished with the establishment of a uniquely Canadian body of law, but rather has
    increased in frequency and diversity”); La Forest, supra note 199, at 212, 217
    (arguing that Canadian courts are characterized by “modern and expanding reliance
    on foreign materials,” but also acknowledging that “recourse to American materials
    [may] become less necessary in the [constitutional] context as [Canada] develop[s] a
    more extensive and distinctive domestic jurisprudence”).
318 See supra notes 30-35 and accompanying text.
148                                              《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



standard” can, in especially controversial or politically sensitive cases,
provide a “kind of safe harbor” from criticism that a court is fashioning
                                                                           319
answers out of whole cloth to suit its own whims.                                Judicial
comparativism can have these legitimating effects, moreover, even if
judicial style disfavors the explicit citation of foreign law. Those in the
legal community have little difficulty recognizing the telltale signs of
                           320
foreign jurisprudence.           No footnote is necessary, for example, when
the TCC suddenly introduces the terminology of “clear and present
         321                                                        322
danger”        in a case involving public demonstrations.                 As one justice
observed: “Yes we say it in Chinese, but people know what it means in
           323
English.”

      No discussion of comparativism would be complete without at least
some discussion of a variable that figures prominently in the
comparative law literature — namely, the distinction between common
law and civil law jurisdictions. Neither legal tradition appears to be
inherently more conducive to comparativism than the other: within East
Asia, one finds examples of both civil law and common law courts (the
KCC and TCC on the one hand; the HKCFA on the other) that engage
heavily in constitutional comparativism. That does not mean, however,


319 Interview with Justice J, supra note 236; see also Sydney Kentridge, Comparative
    Law in Constitutional Adjudication: The South African Experience (suggesting that
    use of comparative jurisprudence helps to ensure that judges do not simply make a
    constitution “mean whatever [they] want it to mean”), in JUDICIAL RECOURSE TO
    FOREIGN LAW: A NEW SOURCE OF INSPIRATION?, supra note 11, at 329, 330.
320 See Kalb, supra note 11, at 424 (observing that the adoption of “key foreign
    concepts” renders the influence of foreign sources “easy to detect in many
    decisions,” even if the sources themselves have not been explicitly identified).
321 Schenck v. United States, 249 U.S. 47, 52 (1919).
322 J.Y. Interpretation No. 445, 1998 SHIZI 15 (Constitutional Ct. Jan. 23, 1998) (Taiwan).
323 See Interview with Justice J, supra note 236 (discussing the sudden appearance of
    the “clear and present danger” test in Interpretation No. 445).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                       149
                Approach to Comparativism

that membership in a particular legal family has no implications for the
practice of judicial comparativism. The effects of this variable are seen
not in whether comparativism is practiced at all, but rather in how it is
practiced.

      First, common law courts tend to be more transparent about
comparativism than civil law courts, in the sense that they are more
likely to reveal their use of foreign law by explicitly citing it in their
           324
opinions.        The HKCFA’s citation practices render its opinions a more
reliable indicator of foreign law usage than those of the KCC, TCC, or
JSC. Second, membership in a particular legal family appears to have a
substantial effect on which jurisdictions tend to be chosen for
comparison. Those jurisdictions that borrowed directly or indirectly from
the German legal tradition continue to look toward Germany, whereas a
history of British colonialism can produce enduring jurisprudential ties
to other Commonwealth nations. The result is what Alan Watson calls
“transplant bias”: courts do not “systematically search” for the most
informative or relevant foreign models but instead return time and time
                                                    325
again to a handful of favored examples.                   These examples will not
necessarily be the most intellectually illuminating or substantively
comparable ones but will instead reflect such factors as historical legacy
                        326
and global prestige.


324 Cf. Tania Groppi & Marie-Claire Ponthoreau, The Use of Foreign Precedents: A
    Limited Practice, An Uncertain Future (noting an “almost perfect correlation”
    between whether a constitutional court explicitly cites foreign law and whether the
    court belongs to the common law or civil law tradition), in THE USE OF FOREIGN
    PRECEDENTS BY CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES , supra note 11, at 411, 412.
325 Alan Watson, Legal Change: Sources of Law and Legal Culture, 131 U. PA. L. REV.
    1121, 1146-47 (1983).
326 See id. at 1147; see also HIRSCHL, supra note 11, at 23, 41-68 (describing the Israeli
    Supreme Court’s tendency to rely heavily on American and Canadian jurisprudence,
150                                             《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



VII. DIPLOMATIC EXPLANATIONS FOR COMPARATIVISM

      Judges sometimes engage with foreign law and foreign courts for
reasons that have little to do with the performance of legal or
adjudicative functions. Their motivations can instead be more diplomatic
than legal in character. Scholars may disagree over the normative
                                         327
desirability of judicial diplomacy,            but as an empirical matter, judicial
diplomacy is already occurring. And it is occurring because
constitutional courts have both opportunities and incentives to practice it.
Diplomacy may not be the primary responsibility of courts, but it is not
entirely alien to them either.

      Judicial diplomacy is an ambiguous term that could describe any of
three conceptually distinct types of behavior, the last of which demands
particular attention. First, ordinary diplomats may make instrumental use
of courts, or seek to influence courts, in the course of conducting
otherwise conventional diplomacy. The work of the courts may be used
as a selling point in the quest for international leadership or acceptance,
as in the case of State Department publications that educate international
                                                       328
audiences about the U.S. Supreme Court                       or Israeli mailings of


    while ignoring other, potentially more relevant bodies of law, as a strategy for
    identifying itself with high-prestige courts).
327 Compare JACKSON, supra note 19, at 123 (noting the possibility that judges may act
    as “diplomats,” but arguing that courts should not view constitutional adjudication as
    a “positive opportunity to advance national interests” or promote their own
    international influence), with Noah Feldman, When Judges Make Foreign Policy,
    N.Y. TIMES, Sept. 28, 2008, (Magazine), at 57, 66 (arguing that “the fact that the
    Constitution affects our relations with the world requires the justices to have a
    foreign policy of their own,” and that the Supreme Court should “weigh national and
    international interests” and consider how the Constitution is perceived abroad when
    engaging in constitutional interpretation).
328 See infra note 340 and accompanying text.
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                        151
                Approach to Comparativism

prominent Israeli Supreme Court decisions to American legal
             329
academics.         Relatedly, diplomats may also seek to encourage courts to
factor foreign policy considerations into their decisions, as when
officials repeatedly drew the Supreme Court’s attention to the damaging
impact of racial segregation on international perceptions of the United
                                              330
States in the context of the Cold War.

      Second, judicial diplomacy might refer to the modes of interaction
                                              331
that courts adopt with one another.                 For reasons ranging from the
jurisdictional to the geopolitical, courts may find themselves employing
stereotypically diplomatic tactics and instruments when dealing with
foreign counterparts. The bywords for this kind of behavior are negotiation
and agreement rather than adjudication and enforcement, tact and
secrecy rather than transparency and justification. Multinational litigation
can trigger judicial diplomacy of this sort: inter-court agreements for
resolving global bankruptcies, for example, have been described as the



329 See Letter from Yariv Ovadia, Consul for Commc’ns & Pub. Affairs, Consulate Gen.
    of Isr. in L.A., Cal., to author (Mar. 8, 2005) (on file with author) (introducing a
    mailing of Israeli constitutional case law on the subject of torture to American legal
    scholars).
330 See MARY L. DUDZIAK, COLD WAR CIVIL RIGHTS: RACE AND THE IMAGE OF
    AMERICAN DEMOCRACY 79-111 (2000) (describing both the arguments made on
    foreign policy grounds against racial segregation by both Justice Department and
    State Department officials, and the manner in which the State Department
    subsequently seized upon the Court’s decision in Brown v. Board of Education, 347
    U.S. 483 (1954), as “the counter to Soviet propaganda it had been looking for”).
331 See, e.g., SLAUGHTER, supra note 12, at 94-95 (reporting that the lack of
    international treaties or guidelines governing global bankruptcies has forced courts to
    create “their own regimes” consisting of “court-to-court agreements”); id. at 86
    (noting that “courts are adapting the general notion of international comity, or the
    comity of nations, to fit the specific needs of courts” and “judges are actually
    negotiating with one another to determine which national court should take control
    over which part of multinational lawsuits”).
152                                                《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯


                                                                                          332
equivalent of “case-specific, private international insolvency treaties.”

       This variety of judicial diplomacy also surfaces as a strategy for
navigating sensitive situations with a high risk of public embarrassment.
Within East Asia, for example, Taiwan’s lack of diplomatic recognition
requires the TCC to employ a diplomatic touch when interacting with
foreign courts. If it wishes to invite foreign judges to Taiwan, it may try
to avoid placing its guests in an awkward position by holding a
conference at a university then inviting judges to attend the conference,
rather than asking foreign judges to visit the TCC itself in their official
            333
capacity.         Similarly, the mere existence of formal relations or other
agreements with other courts may demand confidentiality in order to
                                      334
prevent Chinese interference.

       The third and potentially most controversial form of judicial
diplomacy — and the focus of the present discussion — is the judicial
pursuit of foreign policy goals. The U.S. Supreme Court is a case in
point. From time to time, members of the Court have alluded to the
                                                                                          335
desirability of influencing international audiences in particular ways.


332 Evan D. Flaschen & Ronald J. Silverman, Cross-Border Insolvency Cooperation
      Protocols, 33 TEX. INT’L L. J. 587, 589 (1998).
333 See Interview with Justice M, Current or Former Member of the Constitutional Court
      of the Republic of China, in Taipei, Taiwan ( June 13, 2014).
334 See id.
335 See, e.g., Kersch, supra note 45, at 789 (“The job before us... is to try to transfer
      knowledge from one nation to another, so that, despite cultural, historical, or
      institutional barriers, we can create fairer, more effective judicial systems, including
      safeguards of institutional integrity where they are now lacking.” (quoting a speech
      given by Justice Breyer at NYU Law School)); Toobin, supra note 14, at 50 (“Why
      should world opinion care that the American Administration wants to bring freedom
      to oppressed peoples? ... If we are asking the rest of the world to adopt our idea of
      freedom, it does seem to me that there may be some mutuality there, that other
      nations and other peoples can define and interpret freedom in a way that's at least
      instructive to us.” (quoting Justice Kennedy)).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                       153
                Approach to Comparativism

A particularly revealing example is Justice Breyer’s explanation-cum-
apology for his heavily criticized decision to cite the Supreme Court of
                                                       336
Zimbabwe in an Eighth Amendment case.                        His comments warrant
reproduction in full:

      Look, let me be a little bit more frank, that in some of these
countries there are institutions, courts that are trying to make their way
in societies that didn’t used to be democratic, and they are trying to
protect human rights, they are trying to protect democracy. They’re
having a document called a constitution, and they want to be
independent judges. And for years people all over the world have cited
the Supreme Court, why don’t we cite them occasionally? They will then
go to some of their legislators and others and say, “See, the Supreme
Court of the United States cites us.” That might give them a leg up, even
if we just say it’s an interesting example. So, you see, it shows we read
                                       337
their opinions. That’s important.

      Extrajudicial remarks of this sort reveal a dimension of judicial
motivation that is not made explicit in judicial opinions. What Justice
Breyer describes is a form of judicial statecraft or diplomacy, directed at
such goals as the promotion of judicial independence and the rule of law
                       338
in other countries.          Some may object that the Court has no business


336 See Knight v. Florida, 528 U.S. 990, 996 (1999) (Breyer, J., dissenting from denial of
    certiorari) (citing, inter alia, Catholic Comm’n for Justice & Peace in Zim. v. Att’y-
    Gen., [1993] 1 Zim. L. Rep. 239, 240, 269); see also Anderson, supra note 255, at
    1306-07 (suggesting that Justice Breyer’s citation backfired by lending legitimacy not
    to the Zimbabwe Supreme Court, but instead to “Robert Mugabe’s wicked regime”).
337 Breyer & Scalia, supra note 14.
338 See Alford, supra note 19, at 669 (noting the willingness of certain justices to use
    foreign law not simply to “resolve cases and controversies,” but also to “perform
    functions akin to foreign diplomats,” and describing Justice Kennedy in particular as
    “an evangelist for freedom abroad”); Kersch, supra note 45, at 784-85 (observing
154                                             《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯


                                                                                339
pursuing foreign policy objectives, much less citing foreign law.                     But
                                                                                340
it already does so. In collaboration with the State Department                        and
                                            341
through the Federal Judicial Center,              the Court works to improve the
administration of justice and promote the rule of law in other countries.

      The U.S. Supreme Court is far from alone in practicing judicial
diplomacy of this ilk. Worldwide, it has become commonplace for
judges to address themselves to foreign as well as domestic audiences. In
a survey of supreme court judges from common law jurisdictions, almost
one-fifth of respondents identified “the international community, broadly
                                                                         342
conceived” as part of the audience for their judgments.                        With the
reactions of the international community squarely in mind, constitutional
courts have played a self-conscious role in bolstering or rehabilitating
                                                                      343
the international legitimacy of marginalized regimes                        and global
               344
superpowers          alike.


    that “[i]nternational and transnational support” from judges in “well-established,
    advanced western democracies” can be “a life-line” for judges in “[p]ost-communist
    and post-colonial states” who “are often subjected to intense political pressures”);
    Scalia-Breyer Conversation, supra note 43, at 523 (“The United States Supreme
    Court has prestige in this area. Foreign courts refer to our decisions. And if we
    sometimes refer to their decisions, the references may help those struggling
    institutions.” (quoting Justice Breyer)).
339 See, e.g., Alford, supra note 19, at 670 (quoting former Attorney General Alberto
    Gonzalez’s admonishment that “[t]he Judiciary is not supposed to have a foreign
    policy independent of the political branches”).
340 For an example of glossy literature extolling the virtues of constitutionalism and the
    rule of law (and the Supreme Court as exemplar of said virtues), see BUREAU OF
    INT’L INFO. PROGRAMS, U.S. DEP’T OF STATE, THE U.S. SUPREME COURT: EQUAL
    JUSTICE UNDER THE LAW (2013).
341 See supra note 22 and accompanying text.
342 See Flanagan & Ahern, supra note 11, at 15-16.
343 See Law & Versteeg, supra note 6, at 1181-82 (citing Israel, South Africa, and
    Taiwan as examples of “marginal states” that “have courted foreign approval and
    enhanced their legitimacy by engaging in constitutional conformity”); Ronen Shamir,
    “Landmark Cases” and the Reproduction of Legitimacy: The Case of Israel’s High
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                      155
                Approach to Comparativism

      Comparativism is just one of a number of strategies for conducting
judicial    diplomacy.       Other     common        strategies    include      hosting
international conferences, translating opinions for a broader audience,
and participating in international organizations, but these are not the only
possibilities. The KCC, for example, has adopted a creative, multi-
pronged approach: its efforts to exercise international leadership have
ranged from the relatively conventional moves of participating in the
                          345                                      346
Venice Commission               and organizing the AACC                  to the more
unorthodox moves of hiring a celebrity athlete as goodwill
              347                                                                 348
ambassador          and creating foreign-language cartoons for children.

      In some cases, these alternative strategies may be more effective or
prudent than citing foreign law. For the U.S. Supreme Court, overt
comparativism has the obvious drawback of inviting heavy criticism,
and the fact that it occurs in service of foreign policy goals hardly makes


    Court of Justice, 24 LAW & SOC’Y REV. 781, 783 (1990) (arguing that Israeli Supreme
    Court decisions concerning the occupied territories have not only “enhanced the
    court’s own legitimacy,” but also “legitimized Israeli rule over the territories”);
    Smithey, supra note 310, at 1196 (observing that South African judges were “explicit
    about their use of foreign precedent to underscore the legitimacy of the new
    constitutional regime”); see also JACKSON, supra note 19, at 255-56 (noting that the
    use of “good faith, public reasoning” by constitutional courts “may contribute to [a]
    state’s stature and negotiating power in the international community”).
344 See DUDZIAK, supra note 330, at 90-114 (discussing the impact of Cold War
    geopolitical considerations on the Court’s decision in Brown v. Board of Education,
    347 U.S. 483 (1954)); supra note 22 and accompanying text (describing the Federal
    Judicial Center’s Office of International Judicial Relations).
345 See supra notes 168-170 and accompanying text.
346 See supra notes 172-174 and accompanying text.
347 See supra note 179 and accompanying text (noting Yuna Kim’s appearance in
    multilingual promotional materials for the KCC).
348 See Virtual Tour: Cartoon for Children, CONST. CT. KOREA, http://www.ccourt.go.kr/
    home/english/virtualtour/cartoon01.jsp (last visited Feb. 28, 2015) [http://perma.cc/
    Y4PE-V3BL] (introducing younger audiences to the work of the KCC via a series of
    English-language cartoons on the “Children’s Constitutional Court”).
156                                             《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



it more palatable. Courts such as the KCC and TCC face a different
problem: their opinion-writing conventions tend to favor relatively
                                   349
minimal citation of case law,            which makes it harder for them to curry
favor with foreign courts by citing foreign jurisprudence. Given this
limitation, the KCC’s resort to alternative strategies is unsurprising.

       For other courts, however, importing foreign jurisprudence may be
the best or most appropriate strategy available. The HKCFA illustrates
how judicial comparativism in particular can be especially well suited to
advancing political and economic interests at the international level.
Hong Kong faces the challenge of maintaining its status as a global
financial center and protecting the basic freedoms of its citizens despite
the fact that it is at the mercy of the authoritarian, often oppressive
                      350
regime in Beijing.          Given the lack of democratic governance in Hong
Kong, the judiciary and the HKCFA in particular bear disproportionate
responsibility for (1) protecting the basic rights and freedoms of Hong
Kong residents; (2) upholding the autonomy of Hong Kong from the
                                                                                 351
PRC under the “one country, two systems” constitutional rubric;                        (3)
defending the rule of law in Hong Kong from mainland Chinese


349 See supra note 52 and accompanying text (discussing citation practices in the civil
      law world).
350 See, e.g., Keith Bradsher & Chris Buckley, Protesters in Hong Kong Ease Sit-In at
    Government Headquarters, N.Y. TIMES, Oct. 6, 2014, at A10 (“Real decision-making
    power on the side of the authorities rests in Beijing with China’s president, Xi
    Jinping.”).
351 See Chen, supra note 259, at 272-73 (observing that the “internationalisation” of
    Hong Kong’s constitutional law is “at once a good in itself and a good means to
    enable Hong Kong to resist ‘mainlandization,’” and arguing that for purposes of
    “fortify[ing] Hong Kong against those forces coming from the mainland that may
    erode the freedoms and way of life that the people of Hong Kong cherish,” “there is
    everything to be gained, and nothing to lose, by attaching Hong Kong as firmly and
    closely as possible to the international system for the protection of human rights and
    fundamental freedoms”).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                        157
                Approach to Comparativism

encroachment or the appearance thereof; and (4) reassuring both
domestic and international audiences, including the foreign businesses
and investors that are the lifeblood of the economy, that Hong Kong
remains autonomous and deserving of confidence.

     The HKCFA’s heavy reliance on foreign law advances all of these
goals. As Sir Anthony Mason, a non-permanent member of the HKCFA
and former Chief Justice of Australia, has explained:

     For a newly established court of final appeal, like the [HKCFA],
comparative law has an added attraction. It is important that the Court’s
decisions should be seen to conform to internationally accepted judicial
standards. Indeed, for Hong Kong there is a double attraction: Hong
Kong’s reputation as an international financial centre depends upon the
integrity and standing of its courts. Further, in the context of Hong Kong’s
relationship with the central government in Beijing, it is important that
the decisions of the Hong Kong courts reflect adherence to the rule of
                                                                                352
law in accordance with internationally adopted judicial standards.


352 Mason, supra note 305, at 302-03; see also, e.g., YASH GHAI, HONG KONG’S NEW
    CONSTITUTIONAL ORDER: THE RESUMPTION OF CHINESE SOVEREIGNTY AND THE
    BASIC LAW 323-24 (2d ed. 1999) (arguing that continuity with English law was seen
    as necessary to “reassure the business community” and “enhance the court’s
    prospects of independence”); Anselmo Reyes, The Performance Interest in Hong
    Kong Contract Law (“In the mind of investors, if the Hong Kong court were seen as
    too readily diverging from the common law applicable before July 1997, there would
    be concern that Hong Kong law was mutating into something unknown and
    uncertain. Rational or not, investors’ perceptions might then lead to doubts about the
    continuance of the rule of law in Hong Kong and that could jeopardize the free
    market strategy that is the cornerstone of Hong Kong’s well-being. In short, Hong
    Kong’s history is such that any change in the common law system, let alone radical
    change, risks being perceived by the outside world as introducing an element of
    capriciousness in the operation of the law.”), in REMEDIES FOR BREACH OF
    CONTRACT (Mindy Chen-Wishart et al. eds., forthcoming 2015) (manuscript at 1)
    (on file with author).
158                                             《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



      The benefits of tethering Hong Kong law to foreign law are in some
sense analogous to the benefits of pegging the Hong Kong dollar to the
U.S. dollar. Just as the currency peg stabilizes the Hong Kong dollar, the
tethering of Hong Kong constitutional jurisprudence to the jurisprudence
of a select handful of Commonwealth jurisdictions promotes the stability
and continuity of Hong Kong Law. This stability and continuity, in turn,
help to sustain foreign and domestic confidence in the quality and
                                                                  353
integrity of Hong Kong’s judiciary and legal system.                    The challenges
that Hong Kong faces in maintaining its international competitiveness
and signaling its autonomy from China are ever-present background
considerations that motivate judges to err on the side of citing more
                                  354
foreign law rather than less.



VIII. INSTITUTIONAL EXPLANATIONS FOR COMPARATIVISM

      Unlike the explanations discussed above in Parts VI and VII,
institutional explanations for comparativism give due attention to the
capabilities as well as the preferences of judicial actors. The institutional
environment in which lawyers and judges find themselves shapes both
their ability and their desire to engage in comparativism.


353 See Interview with Judge 1, supra note 265 (observing that the tethering of Hong
    Kong law to foreign law has a “conservatizing influence” on Hong Kong law and
    helps to reassure foreign audiences that Hong Kong remains a part of the common
    law world); Interview with Justice A, supra note 265 (agreeing that the practice of
    comparativism by Hong Kong courts has the effect of boosting foreign confidence in
    Hong Kong’s legal system).
354 See Interview with Judge 1, supra note 265 (quoting a high-ranking Hong Kong
    judge’s advice to continue citing “all these U.K. cases,” even when it does not appear
    necessary to do so, because the practice reassures the rest of the world that Hong
    Kong’s legal system remains up to international standards).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s          159
                Approach to Comparativism

     The impact of institutional variables on judicial ability to practice
comparativism is straightforward. Courts will not use what they lack the
ability to use, and by definition, a court that lacks the resources and
mechanisms necessary to learn about foreign law in a systematic way
will make at most limited use of foreign law. It is no coincidence that,
among the five courts summarized in Table 1, there is a strong
correlation between each court’s institutional capacity for comparativism
and the extent to which each court actually practices comparativism.
Institutional capacity alone may not guarantee that judges will engage in
comparativism, but it is a necessary condition: enthusiasm for foreign
law on the part of individual judges makes little difference if it is not
paired with the time and resources needed to investigate foreign law.

     The impact of institutional variables on judicial preferences is less
obvious but becomes apparent when we consider a key feature of the
institutional environment in which courts operate — namely, the systems
in place for training legal elites. Legal education inculcates skills and
values that shape not only the capabilities, but also the preferences of
legal elites. A system of legal education that fails to promote knowledge
of foreign law is unlikely to produce lawyers and judges with either the
ability or the desire to use foreign law.

     Together, judicial comparativism, institutional capacity, and
comparative legal education form a positive and self-sustaining feedback
loop: each element stokes the development of the others. First,
comparative legal education simultaneously stimulates judicial interest
in foreign law and enhances the ability of courts to make use of foreign
law. Second, judicial comparativism simultaneously generates demand
for comparative legal education and gives courts a reason to invest in
institutional mechanisms for learning about foreign law. Third, the
160                                          《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



existence of such institutional mechanisms simultaneously facilitates
judicial    comparativism        and     creates    prestigious         employment
opportunities that incentivize lawyers to obtain comparative legal
training, which completes the feedback loop.

      It is thus a mistake to say that courts acquire institutional capacity
only if judges are already interested in comparativism, or that
institutional factors are merely epiphenomenal to judicial preferences.
The level of judicial interest in comparativism is not logically antecedent
to the level of institutional capacity for practicing comparativism. Rather,
judicial interest in comparativism is endogenous to the institutional
environment. By manipulating the institutional variables that regulate the
supply of lawyers and judges with exposure to foreign law, it is possible
to influence judicial demand for foreign legal expertise, and vice versa.

      The relevant institutional variables can be divided into two
categories: those involving the internal design of courts, and those
involving legal education. This distinction is somewhat artificial,
however, because the effects of institutional design and legal education
are strongly interdependent.

      A. The Role of Institutional Design
      Judicial usage of foreign law cannot occur without judicial
awareness of foreign law. Judges cannot make use of foreign examples
that they simply do not know. In theory, there are two ways in which
judges might gain the necessary awareness. The first is through judge-to-
                                  355
judge, or “J2J,” interaction.           The second is through institutional
mechanisms built into the court itself, such as the availability of foreign-


355 Law & Chang, supra note 11, at 535 (quoting a member of the TCC).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                       161
                Approach to Comparativism

trained law clerks or the establishment of a research arm that specializes
in foreign law. But these two mechanisms are not equally effective.

      In practice, J2J interaction has proven neither necessary nor
                                                                                      356
sufficient for judges to become sophisticated about foreign law.
Comparison of Taiwan and the United States highlights the inadequacy
of J2J interaction as a means for learning about foreign law.
Opportunities for members of the TCC to interact with foreign judges
are heavily constrained, whereas the members of the U.S. Supreme
Court receive a steady stream of foreign visitors and are in high demand
overseas. It would be difficult to argue, however, that American justices
know more than Taiwanese justices about foreign law. Conferences and
cocktail chatter with members of the German Bundesverfassungsgericht
                                                              357
are poor substitutes for a doctorate in German law.                 By most accounts,
the interactions that judges have with one another at international
                                                             358
conferences and events are “likely to be brief”                     and dominated by
                                                                                   359
“[s]mall talk” with insufficient time for “substantive discussion.”                      It
may be that the members of the U.S. Supreme Court nevertheless learn
from such interactions. If so, however, that may simply reflect a
relatively low baseline level of knowledge.


356 See BOBEK, supra note 11, at 49 (reporting that the type of knowledge obtained from
    judicial meetings, networks, and associations “tends to be superficial, selective, and
    random” and “is rarely of any use for national judicial decision-making”); id. at 74
    (arguing that the impact of “informal exchanges and encounters... on judicial
    decision-making” has been “markedly exaggerated” in the debate over the propriety
    of judicial comparativism).
357 Cf. id. at 49 (observing on the basis of experience as a Czech judicial administrator
    that “most often, judges prefer to talk amongst themselves about anything other than
    their cases”).
358 Interview with Justice B, supra note 244 (indicating that a participant would be
    “lucky to speak to one person for one hour”).
359 Law & Chang, supra note 11, at 567 (quoting members of the TCC).
162                                            《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



       Mechanisms for acquiring foreign legal expertise that are built into
a court’s institutional structure are vastly more effective at promoting
judicial comparativism than sporadic face-to-face interaction with
foreign judges. Comparison of the JSC, KCC, TCC, and U.S. Supreme
Court reinforces the commonsensical conclusion that courts with the
institutional capacity to learn about foreign law make greater use of
foreign law. Conversely, courts that lack such capacity are at a decisive
disadvantage. Put simply, courts cannot do what they cannot do. Even a
judge who wants to make comparative arguments will find it difficult to
                                                                                  360
do without any institutional support, either inside or outside the court.

       Institutional capacity can be broken down into two components,
institutional design and resources. Table 1 summarizes the design
characteristics and resources that shape each court’s capacity for foreign
legal research. As this Table highlights, neither the JSC nor the U.S.
Supreme Court boasts anything resembling the array of mechanisms and
resources for foreign legal research available to the KCC or TCC. It is
no coincidence that neither the JSC nor the U.S. Supreme Court rivals
the KCC or TCC in their use of foreign law. All else being equal, if the
resources available to a court include an array of foreign law
specialists — as in South Korea and Taiwan — the result will be
opportunistic usage of foreign law. Conversely, if resources for
performing foreign legal research are scarce — as in the United States
and, to a lesser degree, Japan — comparative analysis is likely to be less
frequent.



360 See Breyer, supra note 14 (observing that “[n]either I nor my law clerks can easily
      find relevant comparative material on our own,” and urging law professors to
      “supply that demand” by equipping “the law students, who will become the lawyers,
      who will brief the courts” with the skills needed to make comparative arguments).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                       163
                Approach to Comparativism

      In some cases, institutional mechanisms may be introduced for the
purpose of facilitating comparativism. The KCC clearly falls in this
category with its extensive array of researchers and advisers who are
either hired for their foreign legal expertise or dispatched to study law
           361
overseas.        Institutional features need not be intentionally designed to
promote comparativism, however, in order to have that effect. Consider
the design of the TCC, which heightens the court’s capacity for
comparativism but in ways more subtle than the design of the KCC. Two
of the most relevant design characteristics of the TCC are facially neutral
but have a heavy impact when paired with the right resources.

      The first design characteristic is the heavy representation of legal
                                                                 362
academics on the court, which is guaranteed by law.                    On its face, the
fact that a majority of the TCC’s members are former law professors
might seem inconsequential for the use of foreign law. However, the fact
that constitutional scholars in Taiwan overwhelmingly possess foreign
legal training renders their presence a de facto guarantee of the TCC’s
                                            363
ability to engage in comparativism.               By contrast, although Japanese
                                                                              364
law professors also tend to be knowledgeable in foreign law,                        they
                                                                            365
typically hold no more than one of the fifteen seats on the JSC.


361 See supra subsections III.D.2-4, III.D.6 (discussing the qualifications and expertise
    of the Constitutional Research Officers, the Constitutional Researchers, the
    Academic Advisers, the researchers at the CRI, and the foreign correspondents
    contracted by the CRI).
362 See infra Table 1 (breaking down the composition of the TCC by professional
    background); supra note 202 and accompanying text (explaining the abundance of
    legal academics on the TCC).
363 See supra note 203 and accompanying text.
364 See infra Table 1 (reporting the number and proportion of constitutional scholars at
    top Japanese law schools with foreign legal training).
365 See supra note 111 and accompanying text. As of this writing, the only former law
    professor on the JSC is Justice Kiyoko Okabe, who taught family law after lengthy
164                                              《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



      The second design characteristic, which interacts with the first, is
the manner in which law clerks are recruited. Although Taiwan’s justices
are limited to one clerk each, they are free to select clerks of their own
liking. By itself, the vesting of clerkship hiring in individual justices has
little or no inherent tendency to facilitate comparativism: the KCC
makes heavy use of foreign law notwithstanding the fact that its
members have no say over who their clerks will be, while the Justices of
the U.S. Supreme Court have free rein in clerk selection yet rarely
engage in comparativism. The clerk recruitment method matters in the
case of the TCC because those making the hiring decisions are interested
in foreign law and able to recruit from a pool of likeminded potential
clerks. Any institutional design characteristic that gives individual
justices control over resources also enables them to indulge their own
proclivities, and in the case of the TCC, those proclivities happen to
                               366
include comparativism.               Fortunately for the justices, Taiwan’s
educational system generates an ample supply of law graduates with the
necessary linguistic and comparative expertise.

      Now consider, by contrast, the U.S. Supreme Court. Unlike its
counterparts in Korea, Taiwan, and Hong Kong, it simply lacks the
necessary institutional capacity to learn about foreign law in anything
approaching a routine and systematic manner. There is no expectation or
requirement, formal or informal, that the Justices have prior experience


    service as a career judge. See OKABE Kiyoko, SUP. CT. JAPAN, http://www.courts.go.
    jp/english/about/justice/okabe/index.html (last visited Feb. 28, 2015) [http://perma.
    cc/824S-XEZE].
366 Cf. Tokuji Izumi, Concerning the Japanese Public’s Evaluation of Supreme Court
    Justices, 88 WASH. U. L. REV. 1769, 1779 (2011) (suggesting, based on his experience
    as a member of the JSC, that enabling Japanese justices to select their own clerks
    “would invigorate the Court’s deliberations, which in turn could lead to an increase in
    the Court’s production of important jurisprudence”).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                        165
                Approach to Comparativism

with foreign law, and they typically have no formal training in foreign
                 367
legal systems.         Nor, unlike some courts, does the U.S. Supreme Court
even attempt to compensate for these deficiencies by hiring clerks or
researchers with the kind of training, experience, or even language
                                                                           368
abilities, that might help fill the resulting knowledge gaps.                    Instead,


367 Three of the four former academics on the Court as of this writing studied abroad
    over the course of their formal educations, but none focused on law during their time
    abroad. Justices Breyer and Kagan both hold degrees from Oxford, but not in law.
    See Elena Kagan, OYEZ, http://www.oyez.org/justices/elena_kagan (last visited Feb.
    28, 2015) [http://perma.cc/F6XK-KF7W] (indicating that Justice Kagan’s field of
    study at Worcester College, Oxford, was philosophy); Stephen G. Breyer, OYEZ,
    http://www.oyez.org/justices/stephen_g_breyer (last visited Feb. 28, 2015)
    [http://perma.cc/PYU8-QY8B] (indicating that Justice Breyer studied economics at
    Magdalen College, Oxford). Justice Scalia spent his junior year as an undergraduate
    at the University of Fribourg but focused on history, economics, and literature. See
    JOAN BISKUPIC, AMERICAN ORIGINAL: THE LIFE AND CONSTITUTION OF SUPREME
    COURT JUSTICE ANTONIN SCALIA 25 (2009). Justice Ginsburg did not study abroad
    but published repeatedly on the subject of Swedish civil procedure during her time as
    a law professor. See, e.g., RUTH BADER GINSBURG & ANDERS BRUZELIUS, CIVIL
    PROCEDURE IN SWEDEN (1965); Justice Ginsburg Interview, supra note 11, at 805
    (citing various scholarly works by then-Professor Ginsburg on Swedish law).
368 See, e.g., Bentele, supra note 11, at 244 (noting that justices of the South African
    Constitutional Court “have the benefit of up to five clerks selected from applicants
    around the world” in addition to two South African law clerks); Somek, supra note
    91, at 284 n. 1 (attributing the Israeli Supreme Court’s prowess at comparative
    constitutional analysis in part to its “practice of employing clerks from all over the
    world, who do the research work on their country of origin”); supra subsection
    III.D.2 (discussing the practices of the “constitutional research officers” and foreign
    law specialists employed by the KCC).
    A court need not employ clerks or justices who are literally foreign in order to
    possess high institutional capacity for learning about foreign law. Although the
    Canadian Supreme Court does not make a point of hiring clerks from other countries,
    it enjoys both an innate knowledge of, and capacity for learning about, foreign law
    that the U.S. Supreme Court lacks. The unwritten rules governing the allocation of
    seats on the Canadian court on the basis of geography guarantee that a sizeable
    portion of the justices are native francophones with a civil law background. See F.L.
    Morton, Judicial Appointments in Post-Charter Canada: A System in Transition, in
    APPOINTING JUDGES IN AN AGE OF JUDICIAL POWER: CRITICAL PERSPECTIVES FROM
    AROUND THE WORLD 56, 59 (Kate Malleson & Peter H. Russell eds., 2006). So, too,
    are a sizeable fraction of the court’s clerks. The infrastructure for this legal and
166                                            《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



the Court makes do with the help of recent graduates of America’s top
law schools — which neither expect nor require their students to learn
about foreign law — and an obscure arm of the Library of Congress
                                                 369
called the Directorate of Legal Research.

      These meager resources are no match for justices who have studied
law overseas or spent decades publishing scholarly articles about foreign
law, or a cadre of experienced professional researchers with foreign law
degrees or, for that matter, an entire research institute dedicated to the
                                                  370
study of comparative constitutional law.                The result, as described by
Justice Breyer, is hardly surprising: “Neither I nor my law clerks can
                                                                        371
easily find relevant comparative material on our own.”                        If Justice
                                                                                     372
Breyer — a seasoned scholar, a longtime champion of comparativism,
                                                             373
and the most widely traveled member of the Court                   — cannot find the


    linguistic diversification is both intellectual and historical: Canada’s law schools
    provide a combination of common law and civil law training in a combination of
    English and French. See Aline Grenon & Louis Perret, Globalization and Canadian
    Legal Education, 43 S. TEX. L. REV. 543, 549-52 (2002) (describing how certain
    Canadian law schools ensure “direct access to Canada’s legal and linguistic duality”
    by offering both civil law and common law instruction in both official languages).
369 See Alford, supra note 18 (noting that in 2004, the Library of Congress received
    from “judicial agencies” 165 “research requests” pertaining to foreign law); Michael
    Ravnitzky, The Directorate of Legal Research at the Library of Congress: A Treasure
    Hidden Under a Bushel Basket, LLRX.COM (Nov. 22, 2006), http://www.llrx.com/
    features/lclegalresearch.htm [http://perma.cc/RS8C-7UWG] (describing the Directorate
    of Legal Research as a “research department contained within the Library of Congress”
    that “receives scant mention... even among the legal research community”).
370 See supra note 161 and accompanying text (noting that the Korean Constitutional
    Court, Peruvian Constitutional Court, and Argentinian Supreme Court all possess
    their own foreign law research institutes).
371 See Breyer, supra note 14. When asked by the author, one of the Justices confirmed
    that the Court lacks personnel knowledgeable about foreign law, and that this lack of
    expertise discourages comparativism.
372 See Law, supra note 15, at 653-54 & n. 4 (citing various opinions and public
    pronouncements by Justice Breyer).
373 See supra note 28 and accompanying text.
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s               167
                Approach to Comparativism

comparative material that he needs, what hope is there for the rest of the
Court? Comparativism requires more than a willingness or desire on the
part of individual judges to use foreign law. It also requires institutional
support. When it comes to comparativism, the old adage does not hold
true: where there is a will, there is not necessarily also a way.

     B. The Role of Legal Education
     Institutions cannot operate without resources, and no resource is
more crucial to comparativism than an adequate supply of lawyers who
know foreign law. Mechanisms for recruiting judges or clerks with
training in foreign law make little difference if no one possesses the
necessary training. Without the support of Taiwanese legal education, for
example, neither the appointment of legal academics as justices nor the
hiring of experienced law clerks would ensure the TCC’s engagement
with foreign law. The recruitment practices of the TCC promote judicial
comparativism because they tap into a deep talent pool of academics and
law graduates with exposure to foreign law.

     Similar mechanisms would be unlikely to succeed in the United
States because American legal education fails to produce the necessary
talent. Vicki Jackson has argued that there are a number of ways in
which the U.S. Supreme Court might acquire the capacity to learn about
                                                              374
foreign law in a fair, transparent, and accurate manner.            These include
briefing procedures that guarantee adequate and balanced participation
by a combination of court-appointed experts and knowledgeable amici
       375                                             376
curiae,      the hiring of foreign lawyers as clerks,        and more generally


374 See JACKSON, supra note 19, at 190-91.
375 Id.
376 Id. at 189.
168                                             《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



efforts to ensure that it “has within its institutional apparatus personnel
with sufficient education and expertise to assist in research on issues of
                                      377
foreign or international law.”              Even if the Court were willing to
implement such institutional reforms, however, most of them presuppose
a supply of foreign legal expertise that largely does not exist in this
country. The United States does not boast an enormous pool of scholars
who specialize in comparative constitutional law or attorneys with
training in foreign constitutional law. Nor is it easy to import the
necessary expertise, as Congress has by statute barred the hiring of
                                    378
foreign lawyers as law clerks.

      Legal education generates the expectations, values, and resources
needed for judicial comparativism to flourish. In East Asia, law schools
serve as both a source of substantive expertise in foreign law and a
vehicle for normalizing and valorizing the use of foreign law. Legal
education in Japan, Korea, Taiwan, and Hong Kong embodies the view
that the study of foreign law is relevant, worthwhile, and conventional.
The educational background of constitutional law professors at elite law
schools might be considered a rough proxy for the extent to which legal
education supports constitutional comparativism. All but one of the
professors who teach constitutional law at Korea’s top three law
schools — Seoul National University, Korea University, and Yonsei


377 Id. The Korean Constitutional Court is pursuing such a strategy to a dramatic extent
    by establishing its own research institute to be staffed by scholars who are fluent in
    foreign languages. See supra subsection III.D.6.
378 See Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2010, Pub. L. No. 111-117, § 704, 123 Stat.
    3034, 3205-06 (2009) (providing that “no part of any appropriation... shall be used to
    pay the compensation of any officer or employee of the Government of the United
    States” who is not a citizen, a permanent resident “seeking citizenship,” a refugee
    who plans to pursue citizenship, or “a person who owes allegiance to the United
    States”).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                          169
                Approach to Comparativism

                                                                 379
University — have studied law in another country.                      The same is true
of all eight of the constitutional law professors at Taiwan’s leading law
school, National Taiwan University College of Law, and of every tenure-
track constitutional law professor at all three of Hong Kong’s law
           380
schools.         Even in Japan, where judicial comparativism is less
prevalent, most legal scholars possess deep knowledge of at least one
                         381
foreign jurisdiction.          In the area of constitutional law specifically, one-
quarter to two-thirds of the constitutional law faculty at the University of
Tokyo, Keio University, and Waseda University possess some kind of
                           382
foreign legal training.          Schools of this ilk, in turn, produce the lion’s


379 All six of the full-time faculty identified on Seoul National University’s website as
    teaching constitutional law, and all five of the constitutional law professors identified
    on Yonsei University’s website, have studied law overseas. Five of the six
    constitutional law professors at Korea University have foreign legal training. See infra
    Table 1.
380 See infra Table 1.
381 See supra note 113 and accompanying text.
382 The fact that so many Japanese constitutional scholars have studied law abroad at
    some point is all the more remarkable in light of the traditional propensity of
    Japanese law schools to recruit professors directly out of their undergraduate legal
    studies. Until recently, law was an exclusively undergraduate subject in Japanese
    universities. See Chen, supra note 144, at 32-33; Shigenori Matsui, Turbulence
    Ahead: The Future of Law Schools in Japan, 62 J. LEGAL EDUC. 3, 4, 10-11 (2012)
    (describing Japan’s adoption in 2002 of three-year graduate law schools alongside
    the existing four-year undergraduate curriculum in law); Setsuo Miyazawa & Hiroshi
    Otsuka, Legal Education and the Reproduction of the Elite in Japan, 1 ASIAN–PAC. L.
    & POL’Y J. 1, 24 (2000). At present, Japanese universities have both undergraduate
    law faculties and graduate law schools, which overlap to varying degrees. Matsui,
    supra, at 11. At Keio University, one of the graduate law school’s three constitutional
    law professors has studied in the United States, while all three of the constitutional
    law specialists in the undergraduate law faculty have studied abroad. At Waseda
    University, two of the three constitutional law professors in the graduate law school
    and two of the five in the undergraduate law faculty have studied abroad. The
    University of Tokyo’s graduate law school has three constitutional law specialists,
    one of whom has spent time in the United States as a visiting scholar. The
    undergraduate law faculty shares the same three constitutional law professors as the
    graduate law school, plus a constitutional theorist who has not studied abroad. These
170                                             《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



share of the career judges, elite academics, and government officials
who eventually become constitutional court justices.

        By contrast, a system of legal education that simultaneously
celebrates the exceptionalism and superiority of domestic law and
relegates all consideration of foreign law to upper-year elective courses
that are perceived as lacking practical applicability is not a system that
will generate a meaningful supply of lawyers and judges with much
                                                 383
appetite or aptitude for comparativism.                For law schools to highlight
and reinforce the status of comparative law as an endeavor distinct from,
and secondary to, the ordinary work of lawyers and judges is to ensure
that comparative law will be perceived as unimportant or irrelevant by
judges. The result is the “vicious circle” described by former Israeli
Chief Justice Aharon Barak: “[J]udges d[o] not tend to rely on
comparative law; lawyers d[o] not cite comparative law to judges; law
schools d[o] not stress comparative law; scholars d[o] not emphasise
comparative law; judges d[o] not tend to rely on comparative law;
      384
etc.”       Judicial behavior and legal education are mutually reinforcing
and interdependent. Judicial indifference to comparative arguments
gives law schools little incentive to stress comparative law, but law
schools are simultaneously responsible for educating judges to be
indifferent to comparative law.



    tallies are based on a survey of the relevant law school websites in various languages
    conducted by the author’s multilingual research assistants circa August 2014.
383 See Law & Chang, supra note 11, at 576 (observing that the indifference of
    American law schools to comparative training precludes an “adequate supply of
    outstanding judges and clerks” with expertise in foreign law and serves as an
    “obstacle to the emergence of robust judicial comparativism”).
384 Aharon Barak, Comparison in Public Law, in JUDICIAL RECOURSE TO FOREIGN LAW:
    A NEW SOURCE OF INSPIRATION?, supra note 11, at 287, 287.
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                     171
                Approach to Comparativism

     This hypothetical system of legal education bears more than a
passing resemblance to American legal education. There is no
meaningful pool of talent in the United States from which either
potential clerks or judicial candidates with substantial foreign legal
expertise can be recruited. Nor is foreign legal training made more
attractive by the prospect of an academic job, as in East Asia or much of
the rest of the world. Although law school hiring of teaching candidates
who hold both a J.D. and a Ph.D. is accelerating, would-be law
professors who obtained their law degrees in the United States do not go
overseas for their Ph.Ds., and recent hiring trends offer little evidence
that teaching candidates are rewarded by the job market for having
                          385
foreign legal training.         The dearth of such training on the part of the
nation’s law professors, meanwhile, tends to mean that little knowledge
of, or interest in, foreign law will be imparted to the next generation of
          386
lawyers.

     Although legal education is an important determinant of judicial
comparativism, its precise impact is difficult to pin down because it
interacts in complex ways with many other variables. Legal education is
deeply embedded in its social, political, and economic environment,
meaning that it both shapes and is shaped by its environment.



385 See Lawrence Solum, Entry Level Hiring Survey 2010, LEGAL THEORY BLOG (Apr.
    12, 2010), http://lsolum.typepad.com/legaltheory/2010/04/entry-level-hiring-survey-
    2010.html [http://perma.cc/7MM3-BDVR] (listing the educational credentials of
    those hired into tenure-track teaching positions at American law schools in 2010);
    Lawrence Solum, 2009 Entry Level Hiring Report, LEGAL THEORY BLOG (Apr. 26,
    2009), http://lsolum.typepad.com/legaltheory/2009/04/2009-entry-level-hiring-report.
    html [http://perma.cc/S58K-XXRT] (doing the same for 2009).
386 Cf. Patrick M. McFadden, Provincialism in United States Courts, 81 CORNELL L.
    REV. 4, 37 (1995) (arguing that American courts eschew international law partly
    because it is both “unknown” and “unusual” to American judges and lawyers).
172                                            《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



Consequently, the effect of legal education cannot be neatly isolated
from the effect of other environmental factors. There can be little doubt,
for example, that the extent to which a country’s system of legal
education fosters comparativism is influenced by market forces. All else
being equal, lawyers from smaller countries have stronger economic
incentives to learn foreign law: the sheer size of the American and
                        387
Japanese economies             means that American or Japanese lawyers who
ignore foreign law sacrifice fewer opportunities than Korean or
Taiwanese or Hong Kong lawyers who do the same. Student demand for
comparative law presumably translates into increased educational
offerings in comparative law. One could argue, therefore, that the
emphasis in Korea on English fluency and knowledge of American law
merely reflects the fact that those skills are prized by both foreign and
                         388
domestic employers.            Conversely, one might conclude that American
law schools offer little comparative training simply because American
law students generally do not view such training as highly beneficial to
                                  389
their employment prospects.

      It would be a mistake, however, to view legal education as merely
epiphenomenal to market forces, or to conclude that a lack of supply
simply reflects a lack of demand. For a variety of reasons ranging from


387 See INT’L MONETARY FUND, WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK DATABASE (2013),
    available at http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2013/02/weodata/download.aspx
    (identifying the United States, Japan, Korea, and Taiwan as having the first, third,
    fifteenth, and twenty-seventh largest economies in the world, respectively).
388 See supra notes 141-142 and accompanying text (discussing the professional
    opportunities that English fluency and American legal training create for Korean
    attorneys).
389 See Krotoszynski, supra note 32, at 132 (noting the “chicken-and-egg problem” that
    “[l]aw schools do not invest major resources in international and comparative law
    offerings in part because domestic legal employers do not place much value on such
    training”).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                       173
                Approach to Comparativism

                   390
regulatory fiat          to sheer confusion, the legal education industry
responds imperfectly to economic conditions, and to the extent that it
does respond, its responses are the product of internal debate over what
those conditions happen to be and how best to respond. The result is that
the standard American law school curriculum is hardly a faithful
reflection of either student or employer demand. Run-of-the-mill legal
employers in this country may not be clamoring for lawyers well versed
in Chinese or German law, but they are unlikely to view presidential
immunity or equal protection doctrine as enormous moneymakers either.
From a market perspective, it seems just as arbitrary to make
                                                                                     391
constitutional law mandatory as to make comparative law optional.
Indeed, market forces might even favor comparative law over
constitutional law: ongoing weakness in the domestic employment
                         392
market for lawyers,            combined with the growth of transnational legal


390 See, e.g., BRIAN Z. TAMANAHA, FAILING LAW SCHOOLS 12 (2012) (listing various
    accreditation requirements that prevent certain cost-cutting or price-cutting measures
    by law schools).
391 The obvious rejoinder is that law schools mandate constitutional law because the
    Multistate Bar Examination includes a constitutional law component. However, that
    merely begs the question of why bar examiners see fit to test constitutional law
    notwithstanding its irrelevance to the majority of legal practice, which in turn
    implicates the role of legal education in defining what is considered important by
    lawyers.
392 See, e.g., Brian Z. Tamanaha, Is Law School Worth the Cost?, 63 J. LEGAL EDUC. 173,
    174 (2013) (characterizing the job market for law graduates as “bleak” and “not
    likely to improve any time soon”); David Segal, Is Law School a Losing Game?, N.Y.
    TIMES, Jan. 9, 2011, § 3, at 1 (noting, inter alia, the disappearance of “some 15,000
    attorney and legal-staff jobs at large law firms” from 2008 through the end of 2010).
    But see, e.g., Ronit Dinovitzer et al., Buyers’ Remorse? An Empirical Assessment of
    the Desirability of a Lawyer Career, 63 J. LEGAL EDUC. 211, 223-24 (2013) (arguing
    that “the conventional story of crisis is vastly oversimplified,” and that the
    availability of high-salary positions at large law firms for new graduates is a
    misleading measure of the economic value of legal education); Michael Simkovic &
    Frank McIntyre, The Economic Value of a Law Degree, 43 J. LEGAL STUD. 249, 251,
    253-59 (2014) (concluding on the basis of extensive statistical analysis that “law
174                                              《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯


                                                             393
practice and overseas employment opportunities,                    may render foreign
legal expertise an increasingly sensible investment. Neither legal
educators nor bar examiners nor educational accreditation bodies are
mere slaves to market demand. For better or for worse, they make
choices with profound consequences for the ability of judges and
lawyers to navigate an increasingly globalized world, and the choices
they make are not always optimal from a strictly economic perspective.




             CONCLUSION: JUDICIAL DIPLOMACY AND
                 JURISPRUDENTIAL NETWORKS

      Judicial behavior is shaped not only by legal and political
constraints, but also by institutional constraints. Comparativism is no
exception. Institutional constraints on comparativism can take a variety
of forms, ranging from docket pressures that limit opportunities for
              394                                                              395
exploration         to underinvestment in basic research tools.                      It is


    school remains a lucrative investment,” and estimating “a dramatic increase in
    earnings for law degree holders of approximately $57,200 per year,” after controlling
    for hours worked).
393 See, e.g., D. Daniel Sokol, Globalization of Law Firms: A Survey of the Literature
    and a Research Agenda for Further Study, 14 IND. J. GLOBAL LEGAL STUD. 5, 7-11
    (2007) (describing empirically the global expansion of top law firms); Not Entirely
    Free, Your Honour, ECONOMIST, July 31, 2010, at 46 (discussing how a “talented
    graduate from any of the world's top law schools can expect a life of globe-trotting”).
394 See supra notes 85-91 and accompanying text (discussing the docket pressures faced
    by the JSC and the implications of such pressures for a court’s capacity to conduct
    foreign legal research).
395 See E-mail from Clerk 2, Current or Former Court Attorney to a Justice of the
    Supreme Court of the Philippines, to author (May 7, 2014, 8:57 AM EST) (on file
    with author) (noting that the “court library is virtually bare,” “Westlaw access is
    limited to AmJur and Corpus Juris,” and clerks have “no access” to the work of other
    courts “except through Google”); E-mail from Clerk 3, Current or Former Court
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                       175
                Approach to Comparativism

difficult to think of any institutional variable that plays a larger role in
determining the prospects for comparativism, however, than legal
education. An environment in which lawyers and judges are unfamiliar
with foreign law is an environment in which courts will lack either the
taste or the capacity for foreign legal research and judicial
comparativism will be at best sporadic.

      Comparativism is especially dependent upon institutional support
because it is resource-intensive. A typical law clerk armed with a copy of
the Federalist Papers and little else may be reasonably well equipped to
                                                396
engage in what passes for originalism,                while textualism may call for
little more than access to a handful of vintage dictionaries. But there is
no obvious and equivalent shortcut that American judges can use to
perform even a watered-down version of comparativism. No amount of
personal enthusiasm or international travel on the part of the Justices is
likely to make up for the fact that — unlike the members of the Korean
Constitutional Court — they lack a full-time staff of comparativists to
                                                              397
navigate literally an entire world of foreign law.                  Nor is technology
alone the solution. Anyone can operate an Internet search engine and



    Attorney to a Justice of the Supreme Court of the Philippines, to author (May 7,
    2014, 11:20 AM EST) (on file with author) (describing the court library’s collection
    as “prehistoric,” and noting that access to the sole Westlaw subscription in each
    justice’s chambers is rationed according to “office policy”).
396 See, e.g., JACK N. RAKOVE, ORIGINAL MEANINGS: POLITICS AND IDEAS IN THE
    MAKING OF THE CONSTITUTION 11 (1996) (criticizing the Supreme Court’s use of
    “originalist evidence” as “a mix of ‘law office history’ and justificatory rhetoric”);
    Alfred H. Kelly, Clio and the Court: An Illicit Love Affair, 1965 SUP. CT. REV. 119,
    156 (describing the “law-office history” on display in the Court’s opinions as
    “disastrous” from a historian’s perspective).
397 See Breyer, supra note 14 (urging American law professors to help solve the problem
    by equipping “the law students, who will become the lawyers, who will brief the
    courts” with the skills needed to make comparative arguments).
176                                              《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯


                                      398                                               399
locate foreign legal materials,             but very few can digest the results.
                                400                                            401
Critics of comparativism              and sophisticated comparativists                alike
have drawn attention to the perils of invoking foreign law without the
knowledge needed to place that law in context. The requisite
understanding of context is not simply a Google search away. Neither
the competence nor the confidence to engage in comparativism can
easily be acquired without meaningful investment in infrastructure and
education.

      What distinguishes comparativism even more sharply from other
judicial practices, however, is the fact that it is not merely a type of legal
argumentation, but also a form of judicial diplomacy. Scholars may
                                                                              402
disagree over the normative desirability of judicial diplomacy,                      but as
an empirical matter, it is already commonplace. Why else, for example,


398 See HIRSCHL, supra note 11, at 3 (noting that “[v]irtually all reputable peak courts
    across the globe maintain websites where thousands of rulings... may be browsed
    with ease,” and that new online portals allow easy retrieval and comparison of “the
    entire corpus of constitutional texts around the world”).
399 See Law, supra note 47, at 153-54 (observing that an online search for information
    on rare genetic disorders inundates the user with information that is of little use
    without advanced scientific training, and querying whether there is “any reason to
    doubt that online comparative research performed by judges and clerks without prior
    training in foreign law would be plagued by precisely the same problems”).
400 See, e.g., Scalia-Breyer Conversation, supra note 43, at 528-29 (“One of the
    difficulties of using foreign law is that you don’t understand what the surrounding
    jurisprudence is. So that you can say, for example, ‘Russia follows Miranda,’ but you
    don’t know that Russia doesn’t have an exclusionary rule.” (quoting Justice Scalia)).
401 As Sir Anthony Mason—an unusually experienced comparativist who has served on
    the highest courts of Australia, Hong Kong, and Fiji—has observed, the public law
    of other countries “cannot be understood or applied in the absence of a
    comprehensive understanding of its political, historical, social and cultural context.”
    Mason, supra note 305, at 305; see also id. at 306 (observing that even a judge
    already familiar with multiple jurisdictions “may feel that he or she lacks the
    understanding of other systems of law needed to embrace judicial decisions of those
    other systems”).
402 See supra note 327 and accompanying text.
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                        177
                Approach to Comparativism

would courts in non-English-speaking countries go to the trouble and
expense of translating their opinions into English and maintaining
                                   403
English-language websites?               Why would any court operate an entire
research institute for the purpose of conducting foreign legal research
                                                     404
that has no direct bearing on actual cases?                Why would a court invest
considerable resources in launching international organizations and
                                           405
hosting international conferences?               Why do judges who are already
highly sophisticated about foreign law and, by their own admission,
learn relatively little from actual dialogue with foreign jurists
                                                                                       406
nevertheless place a premium upon participating in such dialogue?
Why would judges ever cite foreign law to a greater degree than they
                                          407
themselves consider necessary?                   Without the concept of judicial
diplomacy, all of these practices are somewhat mystifying. But the idea
that courts pursue diplomatic objectives and compete for prestige and
influence makes sense of all of them.



403 The JSC, KCC, and TCC, for example, all operate English-language websites that
    feature English translations of their decisions. See Decisions, CONST. CT. KOREA,
    http://english.ccourt.go.kr (last visited Feb. 28, 2015) [http://www.perma.cc/3BAE-
    RG48] (select “Decisions” from the title bar); Interpretations, JUD. YUAN,
    http://www.judicial.gov.tw/constitutionalcourt/en/p03.asp (last visited Feb. 28, 2015)
    [http://perma.cc/A3C2-LAJQ]; Judgments of the Supreme Court, SUP. CT. JAPAN,
    http://www.courts.go.jp/english/judgments/index.html (last visited Feb. 28, 2015)
    [http://perma.cc/3BAE-RG48].
404 See supra subsection III.D.6 (discussing the KCC’s Constitutional Research Institute).
405 See supra Section III.E (describing the KCC’s role in organizing and hosting various
    international judicial groups and conferences).
406 See supra text accompanying notes 358-359 (observing that various members of the
    JSC, KCC, and TCC were all hard-pressed to identify cases in which J2J interaction
    had taught them “something truly new or unfamiliar” about foreign law).
407 See supra note 354 and accompanying text (describing a high-ranking Hong Kong
    judge’s encouragement to err on the side of citing British law, even if citation is not
    strictly necessary, as a way of reassuring external audiences that the legal system in
    Hong Kong continues to meet international standards).
178                                            《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



      The phenomenon of judicial diplomacy poses an obvious challenge
to traditional conceptions of the role and function of constitutional courts.
But its arrival on the global scene seems inevitable. Constitutional courts
                                                                           408
have long occupied the grey area between law and politics.                       In the
face of globalization, it should come as no surprise that they have begun
to blur the distinction between law and diplomacy as well. The more that
courts interact with one another, the less likely that they will concern
themselves only with the reactions of domestic audiences, and the more
likely it becomes that they will behave in ways intended to influence
those in other countries. Sustained interaction among judges of talent
and ambition is bound to give rise to a desire for recognition and prestige
                                         409
on the part of some participants.              Meanwhile, the multiplication of
hybrid political arrangements that combine traditional states with
                                                                   410
supranational governance and autonomous regions                          increasingly



408 Hans Kelsen’s rationale for advocating separate constitutional courts, and for
    excluding human rights from constitutions, was that constitutional adjudication (and
    rights adjudication in particular) commingles law and politics and contaminates the
    judiciary by turning judges into lawmakers. See Miguel Schor, Judicial Review and
    American Constitutional Exceptionalism, 46 OSGOODE HALL L.J. 535, 554-55 (2008)
    (describing Kelsen’s acknowledgment of the “political nature” of constitutional law
    and the character of constitutional adjudication as “lawmaking”); Alec Stone Sweet,
    Why Europe Rejected American Judicial Review—And Why It May Not Matter, 101
    MICH. L. REV. 2744, 2767-68 (2003) (noting Kelsen’s opposition to adjudication of
    rights claims for fear that “judges would become the lawmakers” and thereby invite
    “political backlash”).
409 See JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU, Discourse on the Origin and Foundations of
    Inequality Among Mankind (arguing that social interaction causes people first to
    compare themselves to others, then to seek superiority over others) (“Everyone began
    to notice the rest, and wished to be noticed himself; and public esteem acquired a
    value.”), reprinted in THE SOCIAL CONTRACT AND THE FIRST AND SECOND
    DISCOURSES 69, 118 (Susan Dunn ed., Lester Crocker trans., Yale Univ. Press 2002)
    (1755).
410 See James N. Rosenau, Governance in a New Global Order (coining the term
    “fragmegration” to describe the ongoing “clash between globalization, centralization
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                          179
                Approach to Comparativism

places courts in the position of having to formulate quasi-diplomatic
strategies for defining and navigating novel relationships among
competing sovereigns.

      Judicial diplomacy and judicial dialogue are both metaphors for the
cross-border interaction that transpires among courts, but they
emphasize very different aspects of that interaction. Whereas the
dialogue metaphor implies communication among open-minded peers
                                                                                  411
for the sake of mutual learning and reasoned problem-solving,                           the
diplomacy metaphor evokes a world in which competing courts jockey
for influence and prestige and the outcome of their competition depends
on factors that are more geopolitical than intellectual in nature. The
dialogue metaphor certainly paints the more flattering picture of judicial
behavior, but it does not capture the whole truth. Transnational judicial
interaction in the twenty-first century is not simply an exercise in
collective learning or intellectual debate. It is also, as the diplomacy
metaphor suggests, an exercise in power politics.

      The political and diplomatic dimensions of transnational judicial
interaction are highly evident in East Asia. For the HKCFA, heavy


    and integration on the one hand, and localization, decentralization and fragmentation
    on the other,” which has resulted in a “bifurcated system” that combines traditional
    nation-states with a competing “multicentric system” of both supranational and local
    authorities), in GOVERNING GLOBALIZATION: POWER, AUTHORITY AND GLOBAL
    GOVERNANCE 70, 70-73 (David Held & Anthony McGrew eds., 2002).
411 See SLAUGHTER, supra note 12, at 70 (describing a “growing dialogue” among
    constitutional court judges “around the world on the issues that arise before them”
    that “both contribute[s] to a nascent global jurisprudence on particular issues and
    improve[s] the quality of their particular national decisions”); Law & Chang, supra
    note 11, at 531 (“The metaphor of dialogue is... attractive because it both implies and
    promises that all participants are both entitled and empowered to speak.... Dialogue
    is supposed to be inclusive, and it is supposed to involve mutual engagement.
    Therein lies much of its appeal.”).
180                                           《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



reliance on foreign jurists and foreign law is a way of asserting and
reinforcing the autonomy from the PRC that Hong Kong is supposed to
enjoy pursuant to treaty arrangements. For the TCC, efforts to interact
with other courts become delicate exercises in diplomacy because such
interaction circumvents Taiwan’s lack of diplomatic recognition and runs
the risk of antagonizing the PRC. For the KCC, mastery of foreign law
and engagement with international organizations are elements of a multi-
pronged strategy aimed at winning regional and global influence.

      Such influence will not be easily won. Any court that wishes to
claim the mantle of constitutional leadership in East Asia must contend
with the twin titans of the German Bundesverfassungsgericht and the
                          412
U.S. Supreme Court.             A current jurisprudential map of the region
would depict a tug-of-war between two constitutional superpowers, with
Germany regaining the upper hand in Taiwan while the United States
gains strength in Korea. But the KCC’s prospects are improved by the
fact that the JSC is a fast-fading competitor. Notwithstanding the
formidable historical advantages conferred by the colonial imposition of
Japanese law, the loss of interest in Japanese constitutional law among
                                            413
Japan’s closest neighbors is palpable.


412 See Overview, supra note 176 (announcing that the KCC used its hosting of the
    World Conference on Constitutional Justice as an opportunity to promote “beyond
    Asia” a “Korean system of constitutional justice” that “differs from the German or
    U.S. models”); Telephone Interview with Unnamed Official, supra note 127 (reporting
    that former KCC Chief Justice Lee Kang-Kook viewed the courts of Germany, Austria,
    and the United States as embodying “mainstream constitutional jurisprudence,” and
    noting a “general consensus” in Korean constitutional circles that the German
    Bundesverfassungsgericht and U.S. Supreme Court are the “big two”).
413 See supra Section III.C (discussing the KCC’s growing indifference to Japanese
    constitutional jurisprudence); supra note 192 and accompanying text & Section IV.C
    (describing the declining influence of Japanese constitutional jurisprudence in
    Taiwan).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                           181
                Approach to Comparativism

      Even if judicial diplomacy can help a well-funded court from a
mid-sized country such as Korea to become more influential and
prestigious within a particular region, success on a worldwide scale may
remain elusive. The globalization of constitutional law is characterized
not only by the emergence of generic or universal elements, but also by
                                                                 414
the persistence of distinct constitutional families.                   Judging from the
patterns of judicial comparativism seen in East Asia, it is difficult for
                                                                                          415
constitutional courts to exercise influence outside their own networks.
This appears to be true for the Bundesverfassungsgericht, which is
prominent and well-respected yet lacks a dedicated following outside the
                                                                            416
civil law world that is commensurate with its reputation.                         Likewise,


414 See Law & Versteeg, supra note 6, at 1221-26, 1243 (concluding on the basis of an
    empirical analysis of constitutional drafting patterns that global constitutionalism is
    characterized by both “a strong and growing generic component” and an ideological
    divide between two families of constitutions, one of which draws heavily upon the
    “Anglo-American legal tradition”).
415 See Chang & Yeh, supra note 44, at 1175 (“Trans-regional discourse [among
    constitutional courts] is rare, and even if it does occur, it usually takes place between
    courts of the same legal family, civil law or common law.”).
416 The influence of the Bundesverfassungsgericht is, of course, not exclusively limited to
    civil law countries. See, e.g., HIRSCHL, supra note 11, at 47 (noting the Israeli
    Supreme Court’s citation of constitutional jurisprudence from Germany in addition to
    a variety of common law countries); Navot, supra note 90, at 145 fig.4 (reporting that
    5.5% of the Israeli Supreme Court’s foreign law citations are to Germany). Not even
    Israel, however, offers especially strong evidence that civil law courts enjoy influence
    outside the civil law world. First, Israel is not a purely common law jurisdiction but
    instead has both common law and civil law characteristics. See JuriGlobe–World
    Legal Systems: Mixed Legal Systems, U. OTTAWA, http://www.juriglobe.ca/eng/sys-
    juri/class-poli/sys-mixtes.php (last visited Apr. 8, 2015) (classifying Israel as
    possessing a “mixed system” of civil law, common law, Jewish law and Muslim law).
    Second, notwithstanding its mixed legal heritage, Israel still exhibits a bias in favor of
    other common law jurisdictions, with Germany constituting the exception to the rule.
    See HIRSCHL, supra note 11, at 43 (noting that the Israeli Supreme Court cites most
    frequently to “American, Canadian, British, and German rulings”); Navot, supra note
    90, at 145-47 (highlighting the dominance of citations to common law jurisdictions,
    and deeming the Israeli Supreme Court’s “minimal number of references to
182                                              《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



the Canadian Supreme Court and South African Constitutional Court are
                                                  417
both praised for their global influence,                yet neither has established a
                                                                                        418
foothold in East Asia outside the common law outpost of Hong Kong.
Just as the influence of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms on
constitutional drafting appears to be confined largely to the common law
        419
world,        it may be that the Canadian Supreme Court and South African
Constitutional Court carry little weight beyond a niche market of other
common law courts in the English-speaking world.

      The traditional cleavage between civil law and common law
countries has not disappeared in the face of globalization but instead
lingers in the form of jurisprudential networks and spheres of influence.
It is consequently a grave error for English-speaking scholars to assume
that the practice of comparativism in their own countries resembles the
practice of comparativism in the rest of the world. Scholars have already
noted the existence of a “Commonwealth model of constitutionalism”




    continental courts . . . surprising in view of the fact that several constitutional-
    institutional issues that the ISC addressed are addressed by European countries as
    well”).
417 See sources cited supra note 98.
418 Even in Hong Kong, references to South African jurisprudence are rare. See Young,
    supra note 242, at 82 tbl.10 (reporting that only 2% of the HKCFA’s case law
    citations are to “other national courts,” a category that includes all courts in Africa,
    Latin America, the Middle East, and all parts of Europe apart from the United
    Kingdom); Interview with Justice B, supra note 244 (indicating that Canadian and
    South African decisions are cited less frequently than other jurisdictions because they
    are “not cited as often to us by counsel,” but that Canada is still cited “more than
    South Africa”).
419 See Law & Versteeg, supra note 1, at 818-21 (finding “robust and growing
    constitutional similarity between Canada and other members of the common law
    family” and concluding that “Canada is, at least to some degree, a constitutional
    trendsetter among common law countries,” but finding no evidence that Canada is
    emulated by “the rest of the world”).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                         183
                Approach to Comparativism

                                                                420
defined by distinctive forms of judicial review                       and packages of
                           421
constitutional rights.           The indifference of Japanese, Korean, and
Taiwanese courts to the leading lights of the common law world
underscores yet another characteristic of the Commonwealth model —
namely, membership in a somewhat insular jurisprudential network that
                                               422
not everyone necessarily cares to join.

      The ECtHR and the U.S. Supreme Court may be the only courts
that truly bridge the divide between these two jurisprudential networks.
At present, they are the only common points of reference for
constitutional courts throughout East Asia. In the case of the ECtHR,


420 Stephen     Gardbaum, Reassessing the New Commonwealth Model of
    Constitutionalism, 8 INT’L J. CONST. L. 167, 167-68 (2010) (identifying a “new
    Commonwealth model of constitutionalism” in the form of institutional variants of
    judicial review that seek to reconcile parliamentary and judicial supremacy).
421 See Law & Versteeg, supra note 1, at 821 (finding evidence of a constitutional “split
    between common law countries and the rest of the world” in the form of the
    emergence of a “Commonwealth model of constitutionalism” that encompasses “not
    only a set of institutional mechanisms for reconciling judicial and legislative power,
    but also a set of substantive rights guarantees and limitations”); Law & Versteeg,
    supra note 6, at 1170, 1221-25 (finding as an empirical matter that constitutions
    divide ideologically into “statist” and “libertarian” camps, the latter of which is
    characterized by the inclusion of historically “Anglo-American” rights provisions
    that “epitomize a common law tradition of negative liberty and, more specifically,
    judicial protection from detention or bodily harm at the hands of the state”).
422 See, e.g., BOBEK, supra note 11, at 84-87, 95 (discussing the strong tendency of
    British courts to cite courts from other Commonwealth countries rather than other
    European countries, “even when interpreting European laws of a unified European
    asylum system,” and observing that “in the cases in which English judges have a
    choice left as to the authority they wish to rely upon... their attention remains fixed
    on the English-speaking common law countries outside of Europe”); Flanagan &
    Ahern, supra note 11, at 21 (reporting that eleven out of forty-three respondents to a
    survey of supreme court judges from common law jurisdictions indicated that “in a
    judgment about domestic rights,” they would only cite other common law
    jurisdictions); Gentili, supra note 309, at 57-59 & 57 tbl.2, 59 graph 4 (reporting that
    roughly 95% of the Canadian Supreme Court’s citations to foreign precedent are to
    decisions from common law jurisdictions).
184                                            《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



there is no shortage of explanations for this crossover appeal. First, the
court itself belongs to both networks: its jurisdiction and its expertise
                                                                         423
span a combination of civil law and common law countries.                      Second,
the ECtHR is a mouthpiece for constitutional jurisprudence in an entire
region of the world. To follow the ECtHR is to follow the practice of not
                                                                424
just one or two countries, but forty-seven countries,                 many of which
are highly prestigious in their own right. Any appeal to the existence of
widely shared norms or practices is thus bolstered if the jurisprudence of
the ECtHR can be invoked. Third, the substantial overlap between the
European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), which the ECtHR is
charged with enforcing, and the International Covenant on Civil and
                               425
Political Rights (ICCPR)             means that courts faced with the task of
interpreting the ICCPR or analogous instruments have a natural reason
                                              426
to consider the case law of the ECtHR.

      The crossover appeal of the U.S. Supreme Court, by comparison,
cannot be taken for granted. Not only does the Supreme Court lack the
aforementioned advantages of the ECtHR, but there is also mounting
evidence that the global influence of American constitutionalism is in



423 See EUR. COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS, JUDGES OF THE COURT SINCE 1959 (2015),
    available at http://www.echr.coe.int/Documents/List_judges_since_1959_ENG.pdf
    (listing all judges who have served on the ECtHR since 1959, including a number
    from Ireland and the United Kingdom).
424 See Our Member States, COUNCIL EUR., http://www.coe.int/en/web/about-us/our-
    member-states (last visited Feb. 28, 2015) [http://perma.cc/8BSG-V7FP] (listing the
    member states of the Council of Europe).
425 See Law & Versteeg, supra note 1, at 845 (“The ECHR, like the ICCPR, primarily
    features traditional, first-generation civil and political rights.”).
426 See, e.g., Lam Siu Po v. Comm’r of Police, [2009] 12 H.K.C.F.A.R. 237, 263B
    (C.F.A.) (H.K.) (deeming the ECtHR’s jurisprudence on article 6(1) of the ECHR “of
    immediate relevance” to interpretation of article 14.1 of the ICCPR “notwithstanding
    certain differences in wording”).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                         185
                Approach to Comparativism

           427
decline.         The persistence of the Court’s influence in a particular
corner of the globe is open to a number of possible explanations. It may
be that East Asia is atypically receptive to American influence, for
example,         or   that   foreign     interest    in    American       constitutional
jurisprudence still has a long way to fall before it disappears. The latter
view is more than plausible. The U.S. Supreme Court pioneered the
practice of judicial review and continues to boast one of the most
extensive bodies of constitutional jurisprudence in the world. Even if
constitutional courts elsewhere have indeed grown increasingly
lukewarm toward its work, the recognition and prestige that it earned
over the course of two centuries are unlikely to dissipate overnight.

      It is increasingly clear, however, that the Court faces greater
competition than ever for the attention of foreign audiences. Other courts
are now at least as eager to export their own jurisprudence, and the
forces of globalization only make it easier for them to do so. Whether
the U.S. Supreme Court’s influence overseas will endure in the face of
old rivals and new challengers alike is likely to depend on factors as
                                                                 428
diverse as the availability of overseas scholarships,                  the attractiveness


427 See Law & Versteeg, supra note 1, at 766-68, 799-804 (summarizing the existing
    literature on the declining influence of American constitutional jurisprudence, and
    documenting empirically the declining influence of the U.S. Constitution on
    constitutional drafting practices); id. at 768 & n. 18 (reviewing various empirical
    studies to the effect that “citation to U.S. Supreme Court decisions by foreign courts
    is in fact on the decline”); Liptak, supra note 98, at A1 (reporting that foreign courts
    are paying decreasing attention to American jurisprudence, particularly in the area of
    constitutional rights).
428 German and American investment in the education of foreign lawyers has paid
    tangible dividends in Taiwan. Historically, the prevalence of citations to German law
    as opposed to U.S. law has tracked the balance of power on the TCC between former
    Deutsche Akademischer Austausch Dienst scholars (funded by Germany) and former
    Fulbright scholars (funded by the United States). See Law & Chang, supra note 11,
    at 576-77 & 577 n. 18. Germany also invests in the training of foreign lawyers via
186                                             《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯



of the U.S. legal market, and the status of English as the lingua franca of
law and commerce. But a little judicial diplomacy could not hurt either.




      the government-funded Humboldt Foundation, which counts various prominent
      foreign jurists among the recipients of its fellowships. See, e.g., Press Release,
      Alexander von Humboldt Found., Humboldtian Elected President of Hungary (June
      7, 2005), available at http://www.humboldt-foundation.de/web/33749.html (hailing
      the election of Laszlo Solyom, former chairman of the Hungarian Constitutional
      Court and former Humboldt Fellow, as President of Hungary).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                              187
                Approach to Comparativism



Table 1: Comparative Overview of Constitutional Adjudication in
       Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, and the United States

                 Japan          South Korea      Taiwan          Hong Kong        United States
Court with      Supreme         Constitutional   Constitution    Hong Kong        U.S. Supreme
final authority Court of        Court of Korea   al Court of     Court of Final   Court
over            Japan           (specialized     the Republic    Appeal           (general
constitutional (general         jurisdiction)    of China        (general         jurisdiction)
questions       jurisdiction)                    (specialized    jurisdiction)
                                                 jurisdiction)

                     429             430            431             432                  433
Docket (cases 12,000+           1500+            500             115              10,000+
filed per year)

                        434          435              436             437            438
Decisions per    12,000+        1500+            20-30           20-30            100
year

Number of        15             9                15              No fixed       9
justices                                                         number;
                                                                 at least 4
                                                                 permanent
                                                                 justices (PJ),
                                                                 plus up to 30
                                                                 non-permanent



429 See supra note 85 and accompanying text.
430 See supra note 88 and accompanying text (reporting docket statistics for the KCC as
     of 2013).
431 Justices of the Constitutional Court: Cases Commenced, Terminated, and Pending,
     supra note 89.
432 Young & Da Roza, supra note 284, at 1 (reporting that, over its first thirteen years of
    existence, the HKCFA “disposed of approximately 1,162 applications for leave [to
    appeal], averaging 89 applications per year” and “decided 325 cases, averaging
    about 25 cases per year”).
433 The Justices’ Caseload, supra note 87.
434 See supra note 85 and accompanying text.
435 See supra note 88 and accompanying text.
436 Law & Chang, supra note 11, at 547–48.
437 See Young, supra note 242, at 69.
438 The Justices’ Caseload, supra note 87.
188                                                 《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯


                Japan         South Korea          Taiwan        Hong Kong       United States
                                                                 justices from
                                                                 Hong Kong
                                                                 (HKNPJ) and
                                                                 overseas
                                                                         439
                                                                 (ONPJ)

                                                                                    445
Term of         Retention      6 years; subject    8 years;      PJ: Guaranteed Life
justices        election after to reappointment;   cannot be     tenure until age
                initial        mandatory           reappointed   65, with
                appointment retirement at 65       to            possibility of
                then at        (70 for President   consecutive   up to 2
                                        441            442
                10-year        of KCC)             term          additional
                intervals                                        3-year
                                                                       443
                thereafter;                                      terms
                mandatory                                        HKNPJ,
                retirement at                                    ONPJ:
                   440
                70                                               Renewable
                                                                 3-year terms;
                                                                 no age
                                                                      444
                                                                 limit

Appointment     Appointed     Appointed by         Nominated Appointed by        Nominated by
of justices     by            President; 1/3       by President; Chief           President;
                       446
                Cabinet       nominated by         confirmed     Executive on    confirmed by



439 Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal Ordinance, (1997) Cap. 484, 3-4, §§ 5(5), 10
      (H.K.). The minimum of four permanent justices includes the Chief Justice. Id. § 5.
440 NIHONKOKU KENPŌ [KENPŌ] [CONSTITUTION], art. 79 ( Japan).
441 Constitutional Court Act, Act No. 4017, Aug. 5, 1988, art. 7 (S. Kor.), translated in 1
    STATUTES OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA 93 (Korea Legislation Research Inst. 1997 &
    Supp. 51).
442 The President and Vice President of the Judicial Yuan are also members of the
    Constitutional Court (the President is the Chief Justice) but do not enjoy the
    constitutional guarantee of an eight-year term. MINGUO XIANFA ZENGXIU TIAOWEN art.
    5 (2005) (Taiwan).
443 Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal Ordinance, (1997) Cap. 484, 3-4, § 14(b) (H.K.).
444 Id. §§ 14(3), 14(4).
445 U.S. CONST. art. III, § 1 (providing that judges of both “the supreme and inferior
    Courts, shall hold their Offices during good behaviour”).
446 NIHONKOKU KENPŌ [KENPŌ] [CONSTITUTION], art. 79, para. 1 ( Japan). Technically,
    the Chief Justice is appointed by the Emperor but is “designated by the Cabinet.” Id.
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                              189
                Approach to Comparativism

                 Japan      South Korea         Taiwan           Hong Kong        United States
                            National            by               recommendati     Senate
                            Assembly; 1/3       Legislative      on of judicial
                                                     448
                            nominated by        Yuan             nominating
                            Chief Justice of                     commission
                            Supreme
                                 447
                            Court
                                                450
Eligibility      None       Must be at least    Must fall in     PJ: (1) Sitting None
requirements                40 years old and one of five         local judge, or
for justices                have at least 15    categories:      (2) barrister
                            years of            (1) Supreme      with 10+ years
                            experience as (1) Court justice      of local
                            judge, prosecutor, with 10+          experience
                            or attorney; (2) a years             HKNPJ: (1)
                            public or private experience;        Retired local
                            employee in a       (2) legislator   judge, or (2)
                            “law-related        with 9+          barrister with
                            area” with a        years            10+ years of
                            license to practice experience;      local
                                                                             451
                            law; or (3) a legal (3) law          experience
                            academic of         professor        ONPJ: active
                            assistant           with 10+         or retired judge
                            professor rank or years              from “another
                            higher at an        experience;      common law
                            accredited          (4) served       jurisdiction”
                            university with a on ICJ “or         who is
                            license to practice have             “ordinarily
                                449
                            law                 published        resident



    art. 6(2).
447 Constitutional Court Act, Act No. 4017, Aug. 5, 1988, art. 6(1), amended by Act No.
    7622, July 29, 2005 (S. Kor.), translated in 1 STATUTES OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA,
    supra note 441.
448 MINGUO XIANFA ZENGXIU TIAOWEN art. 5 (2005) (Taiwan).
449 Constitutional Court Act, Act No. 4017, Aug. 5, 1988, art. 5(1) (S. Kor.), translated
    in 1 STATUTES OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA, supra note 441; see CONSTITUTIONAL
    COURT OF KOREA, supra note 88, at 110.
450 Ssu Fa Yuan Tsu Chih Fa [Organic Act of the Judicial Yuan], art. 4, para. 1, 37
    ZHONGHUA MINGUO XIANXING FAGUI HUIBIAN 25399, 25400 (1957) (Taiwan); see
    Law & Chang, supra note 11, at 545–46 n. 93 (discussing the statutory eligibility
    requirements for appointment to the TCC). In practice, law professors have
190                                          《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯


                Japan      South Korea      Taiwan       Hong Kong       United States
                                            authoritative outside Hong
                                                                 452
                                            works in the Kong”
                                            fields of
                                            public or
                                            comparative
                                            law”; (5) be
                                            “highly
                                            reputed in
                                            the field of
                                            legal
                                            research and
                                            have
                                            political
                                            experience”;
                                            no more
                                            than 1/3 of
                                            all justices
                                            may be
                                            drawn from
                                            any given
                                                      450
                                            category

Use of merits   Most cases None             None         Cases decided None
panels          decided by                               by a panel of 5,
                petty bench                              usually
                of 5 justices;                           consisting of
                major cases                              the Chief
                decided by                               Justice, 3 PJ,
                grand bench                              and 1 ONPJ
                of all 15




    comprised a majority of the court because they have been appointed under multiple
    categories. See id. at 546; supra note 202.
451 Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal Ordinance, (1997) Cap. 484, 4, § 12(3) (H.K.).
    Sitting members of the Court of Appeal are also eligible for appointment as non-
    permanent justices. Id.
452 Id. § 12(4).
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                          191
                Approach to Comparativism

                Japan          South Korea        Taiwan    Hong Kong         United States
Clerks          None           3.5 (2 permanent   1         None; may be      4453
assigned to                    clerks and 1.5               introduced on a
each justice                   temporary clerks             trial basis
                               on loan from the
                               Supreme Court
                               and Ministry of
                               Justice)

Shared clerks   37             (1) 25-30        None        Varies; 5 as of   None
                                                                 454
                               permanent clerks             2016
                               (2) 5-10
                               temporary clerks
                               from various
                               agencies
                               (3) 5-7
                               researchers
                               specializing in
                               foreign law

Clerk           High           High               Medium    Low               Low
experience

Specialized     Yes; all       Yes; shared        No        None              None
clerks          clerks are     clerks are divided
                divided into   into 3 teams
                3 teams        (civil/political
                (civil,        rights, economic/
                criminal,      property rights,
                and            and social
                administrati   welfare
                    455               456
                ve)            rights)



453 See TODD C. PEPPERS, COURTIERS OF THE MARBLE PALACE: THE RISE AND
    INFLUENCE OF THE SUPREME COURT LAW CLERK 31 (2006) (observing that the
    number of law clerks per justice has risen from two to four over the last fifty years);
    ARTEMUS WARD & DAVID L. WEIDEN, SORCERERS’ APPRENTICES: 100 YEARS OF LAW
    CLERKS AT THE UNITED STATES SUPREME COURT 23 tbl.1.1 (2006) (summarizing the
    evolution of the Supreme Court’s use of law clerks).
454 See E-mail from Justice A, supra note 297.
455 Law, supra note 79, at 1579.
456 Prior to early 2013, the shared Constitutional Research Officers were divided into
192                                              《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯


               Japan        South Korea         Taiwan       Hong Kong       United States
Career judges 6/15          7/9                 Some         None            None
on court

Academics on 2/15           0/9                 8/15         PJ: 1/4         4/9
court                                                        HKNPJ,
                                                             ONPJ: 0/18

Interaction    Medium       High                Low          High            High
with foreign
courts and
judges

Dedicated      None         (1) Researchers     None         None            None
mechanism(s)                hired for their
for foreign                 doctoral-level
legal research              expertise in
                            foreign law
                            (2) Professors
                            assigned to clerk
                            teams
                            (3) Dedicated
                            “Constitutional
                            Research
                            Institute”
                            (4) Network of
                            foreign
                            correspondents

                                                     457
Foreign-       2/15         4/9                 11/15        PJ: 4/4 (UK)    0/9
trained        US: 2        US: 3               Germany: 7   ONPJ: 1/1
justices                    Germany: 1          US: 4        (UK, Australia,
                                                Japan: 2     or New



    four teams (public benefits, criminal, economic rights, and political rights). See
    Telephone Interview with Unnamed Official, Constitutional Court of the Republic of
    Korea (Aug. 29, 2013).
457 Justice Beyue Su-Chen obtained an MBA in the United States and subsequently
    served as a chief financial officer at an American company. See Justices of the
    Constitutional Court, JUD. YUAN, http://www.judicial.gov.tw/constitutionalcourt/en/
    p01_03_01.asp?curno=125 (last visited Feb. 28, 2015) [http://perma.cc/P3HR-
    6TAD]. She is included in the count of eleven foreign-trained justices. Id.
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                            193
                Approach to Comparativism

                 Japan         South Korea       Taiwan      Hong Kong          United States
                                                 China: 1458 Zealand)

Foreign law    Low             Law firms tend to Low           High             Low
usage by                       hire foreign law
parties and/or                 experts for cases
their                          that receive oral
attorneys                      argument (i.e.,
                               high-profile
                               cases)

Foreign-       Roughly         (1) Majority of     Most        Majority         None
trained clerks half,           clerks (around                  UK: 2/5
               including at    60%) have                       Australia: 1/5
               least one       foreign training
               German-         (2) Additional
               trained and     researchers are
               one French-     hired specifically
               trained clerk   for their expertise
                               in foreign law
                               (3) Research
                               Institute
                               personnel all
                               have foreign
                               training

Foreign-         University    Seoul National    National      University of   Harvard:
trained          of Tokyo:     University:       Taiwan        Hong Kong:      2/28 (7%)
constitutional   1/4 (25%)     6/6 (100%)        University:   10/10 (100%) Stanford:
scholars at      Keio          Korea University: 8/8 (100%)    Chinese         1/16 (6%)
elite law        University:   5/6 (83%)                       University of   Yale:
schools          4/6 (66%)     Yonsei                          Hong Kong:      2/19 (11%)
                 Waseda        University: 5/5                 8/8 (100%)
                 University:   (100%)                          City University
                 4/8                                           of Hong Kong:
                       459
                 (50%)                                         3/3 (100%)


458 Three of the current justices studied abroad in more than one foreign country. See
     supra text accompanying note 202.
459 As of this writing, all three of the Japanese universities listed in the table possess
     both graduate law schools and undergraduate law faculties. The figures reported in
     this table reflect the total number of constitutional law professors across both the
194                                             《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第十一輯


               Japan        South Korea       Taiwan       Hong Kong         United States
Foreign law    5%460        5-10%             Majority     100%              Less than
                                                                                  462
citation                                      opinions:                      0.3%
                                              1-2%
                                              Separate
                                              opinions:
                                                     461
                                              13-22%

Foreign law    Occasional   Automatic         Automatic    Automatic         Rare
research

Acceptance of High          High              High         High              Low
foreign law
usage

Constitutional None         None              None         (1) Courts may None
provision(s)                                               “refer to
addressing                                                 precedents of
judicial usage                                             other common
of foreign or                                              law
international                                              jurisdictions”
                                                           463
law
                                                           (2) Courts
                                                           must apply
                                                           “common law”
                                                           that was
                                                           “previously in
                                                           force” under
                                                                       464
                                                           British rule
                                                           (3) ICCPR,
                                                           ICESCR, and
                                                           “international



    graduate and undergraduate programs. For a breakdown of the graduate versus
    undergraduate faculty at each school, see note 382 above.
460 See Ejima, supra note 71, at 277, 283 (counting 11 cases in which foreign law was
    cited, out of a total of 234 constitutional cases decided from 1990 through mid-2008).
461 Law & Chang, supra note 11, at 557.
462 This count reflects citations to foreign cases in constitutional decisions rendered by
    the Rehnquist and Roberts Courts as of 2010. See Sperti, supra note 16, at 405.
463 XIANGGANG JIBEN FA art. 84 (H.K.).
464 Id. arts. 8, 87.
Keynote Speech: Comparing the Taiwanese Constitutional Court’s                           195
                Approach to Comparativism

                Japan      South Korea         Taiwan          Hong Kong       United States
                                                               labour
                                                               conventions”
                                                               “remain in
                                                                     465
                                                               force”
                                                               (4) Foreign
                                                               judges
                                                                         466
                                                               permitted

Jurisdictions   U.S.       Germany             Germany         U.K.            N/A
most            Germany    U.S.                U.S.            Canada
frequently      ECtHR      Japan (high but     Austria         U.S.
considered      (rising)   declining)          Japan           Australia
                           ECtHR (low but      (declining)     New Zealand
                           increasing)         ECtHR           ECtHR
                           France              (rising)        South Africa
                           (legislation, not   Korea (rare     (rare)
                           case law)           but rising)
                                               France (rare)
                                               Switzerland
                                               (rare)




465 Id. art. 39.
466 Id. arts. 82, 84.
