    Hong Kong’s Changing Rule of Law
Academia Sinica Law Journal                                                              1
2022 Special Issue, pp. 1-20 (May 2022)




       Hong Kong’s Transformed Criminal
               Justice System:
                               Instrument of Fear

                                                         ＊
                                 Jerome A. Cohen


                                        Abstract
      This essay demonstrates how recent, comprehensive changes in
Hong Kong’s criminal justice system have transformed it into an
instrument of fear that has understandably intimidated a formerly vibrant
society into political silence. An intensive surveillance system now
reaches every aspect of society. Aggressive criminal investigation
techniques now invade formerly protected freedoms of expression.
Aided by reversal of the traditional presumption in favor of bail pending
trial, government now punishes people under the new National Security
Law (NSL) by detaining them for months or years before cases are
finally decided. Recent restrictions on Legal Aid limit prospects for
independent criminal defense. Political operatives now decide whether
and what types of NSL prosecutions should be brought. Trial by jury has
been eliminated for major NSL offenses, and only judges who are
deemed politically reliable can adjudicate such trials. Also, appellate
judges are under various pressures, and constitutional issues that were


＊     Jerome A. Cohen, a retired New York University School of Law professor and
      Faculty Director Emeritus of its US-Asia Law Institute, is Adjunct Senior Fellow for
      Asia at the Council on Foreign Relations. He formerly served as Associate Dean for
      international studies, Jeremiah Smith Professor and Director of East Asian Legal
      Studies at the Harvard Law School and, while practicing international law based in
      Hong Kong, as Honorary Professor at the Hong Kong University Law School.
      Online: http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/82714022.pdf.
2                                 《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）


formerly thought to be the exclusive province of the Hong Kong courts
are now dictated by the Standing Committee of China’s National
People’s Congress. Moreover, increasingly, local criminal procedures
that do not fall under the NSL are nevertheless being adversely affected
by the current obsession with national security. The NSL era’s
transformation of criminal justice has effectively suppressed popular
protests and democratic practices.

KEYWORDS: national security, surveillance, criminal justice,
          investigation, bail, jury, defense lawyers, prosecutors,
          judges, Constitutional Law, human rights.



                                **********


     I welcome the decision of Academia Sinica’s Law Institute to
consider recent developments affecting Hong Kong’s changing rule of
law and am grateful for the invitation to take part. This topic is surely
one of the most important in relations between the People’s Republic of
China (PRC) and the world’s liberal democracies, and, understandably,
many people in Taiwan have special interest in Hong Kong’s fate.
     In the 1984 Joint Declaration between the United Kingdom (UK)
               1                                                          2
and the PRC, and the PRC’s 1990 Basic Law for Hong Kong, the
PRC promised that a “high degree of autonomy” would prevail in its
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR). Now that “high
degree of autonomy” has systematically been forced to yield to the


1 Joint Declaration of the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
  Northern Ireland and the Government of the People’s Republic of China on the
  Question of Hong Kong, China-U.K., Dec. 19, 1984, 1399 U.N.T.S. 33.
2 The Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s
  Republic of China [Basic Law] art. 2 (H.K.).
Hong Kong’s Transformed Criminal Justice System                                   3


“comprehensive jurisdiction” over the SAR recently imposed by the
PRC central authorities. This was dramatically illustrated by the 2020
                                                                         3
enactment of the National Security Law for Hong Kong (NSL) and its
expansive application by the Hong Kong Government (HKG) under the
instructions of the PRC Central Government and the Chinese
Communist Party (CCP).

     To be sure, even before the NSL’s appearance, the HKG, drawing
upon the arsenal of potentially repressive measures inherited from the
British colonial regime, took many steps seeking to quell the protests of
                                      4
an increasingly restive populace. And it intensified its resort to those
measures, including the pre-NSL criminal process, even after the NSL’s
implementation in a parallel enforcement policy that constituted a two-
pronged offensive against political dissenters. Yet it was the NSL itself,
secretly drafted by the PRC’s Standing Committee of the National
People’s Congress without consulting the Hong Kong community and
suddenly issued with the impact of a thunderbolt, which profoundly
altered the local landscape.

     How should we assess these developments? The Law Institute has
invited several scholars to contribute their comments, and my hope is
that our collective analyses will enhance an accurate understanding of
the PRC’s “comprehensive jurisdiction” over a helpless, indeed hapless,
Hong Kong. We cannot, like some of the prominent defenders of
Beijing’s policies toward Hong Kong, content ourselves with the
assurance of Voltaire’s Candide that the current situation is indeed “the


3 The Law of the People’s Republic of China on Safeguarding National Security in the
  Hong Kong Special Administrative Region [hereinafter NSL], (2020) (H.K.).
4 See Victoria Tin-bor Hui, The Bad Birth and Premature Death of “One Country, Two
  Systems” in Hong Kong, 2022 ACADEMIA SINICA L.J. (SPECIAL ISSUE) 159 (2022).
4                                   《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



best of all possible worlds”. If they are to be minimally persuasive,
Beijing’s supporters cannot blithely sweep all the opposition’s chess
pieces off the table. Many challenges must be recognized and answered.

      My remarks will focus on some of the most salient features of the
NSL’s ongoing transformation of the SAR’s criminal justice system.
Some CCP supporters claim that the overnight “mute acceptance” of the
new NSL regime by Hong Kong people, two million of whom had
recently publicly protested against Beijing’s earlier repressive measures,
should be attributed to a sudden reassertion of the community’s
traditional “obsession with stability and security” more than to the
                                                                           5
HKG’s increasingly harsh law enforcement in the NSL era.                       This
alleged startling return to conservative values, and supposed indifference
to government and politics, seems far-fetched. Yet most contemporary
Hong Kongers, even the many now passionately devoted to democratic
values, do remain practical people. Understandably, they see no wisdom
in sacrificing themselves to the stigmatization and imprisonment that the
NSL, and the many recent prosecutions based on pre-NSL legislation
prohibiting “sedition” and “unauthorized assembly”, have inflicted on
many of the SAR’S democratic leaders and activists.

      The CCP, the NSL agents it sent from the mainland, and its minions
in the SAR government promptly demonstrated that the power to
arbitrarily deprive people of their personal liberty, as well as their
freedoms of expression, is the power to silence a dissatisfied community
by destroying the careers, families and civic support systems of the
targeted resisters. This is an application of Chairman Mao’s famous


5   See Lau Siu-kai, ‘Color Revolution’ Ends as Public Support Falters, CHINA DAILY
    (Oct. 10, 2021), https://www.chinadailyhk.com/article/242373.
Hong Kong’s Transformed Criminal Justice System                                   5


maxim that “political power grows out of the barrel of a gun”. Beijing’s
use of the NSL to manipulate and distort Hong Kong’s post-colonial
criminal justice system has imposed the silence of the graveyard on a
vibrant people. The fear that arbitrary criminal justice has long created
among PRC citizens on the mainland has now been brought to their
                         6
Hong Kong comrades.

     How has this been done? “Comprehensive” is indeed the right word.
The entire SAR criminal process has been affected from start to finish.
Surveillance — the various methods of police acquisition of information
about the activities of Hong Kong residents — has been intensified to an
unprecedented degree. The new law permits anyone to make an
anonymous phone call to the police accusing others of possible NSL
            7
violations. PRC secret police, who formerly acted unobtrusively and to
a limited, albeit ruthless, extent in the SAR, now are authorized to act
openly though their newly-established and legally unrestricted Office for
                                      8
Safeguarding National Security. They not only “guide” and “assist”
local police in relevant operations but also conduct their own independent
investigations based on their experience managing the system of
surveillance and informants that so effectively prevails on the mainland.

     Radio, television, newspapers, social media, public meetings, civic
groups, advertisements, theater, cinema and art museums are now


6 See Perry Link, The CCP’s Culture of Fear, N.Y. REV. (Oct. 21, 2021), https://www.
  nybooks.com/articles/2021/10/21/chinese-communist-party-ccp-culture-fear.
7 Official Launch of National Security Department Reporting Hotline, HONG KONG
  POLICE FORCE, https://www.police.gov.hk/ppp_en/03_police_message/nsdrh.html (last
  visited Nov. 12, 2021).
8 NSL §§ 57-60 (H.K.). See also Donald Clarke, Hong Kong’s National Security Law:
  An Assessment, CHINA LEADERSHIP MONITOR (July 13, 2020), https://www.prcleader.
  org/clarke.
6                                   《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



scrutinized for possible “anti-patriotic” sentiments that the authorities
might decide to brand as violations of one or more of the NSL’s vague
prohibitions against secession, subversion, terrorism or collusion with
                9
foreign forces. The risk of criminal punishment has made many people
afraid to express themselves, even in private messages on the Internet
and telephone, whether local or international. If Hong Kong’s famous
film industry were still free, it would soon have sufficient material to
make a local sequel to the German movie “The Lives of Others” that so
graphically depicted the protean impact of the former Communist East
Germany’s infamous secret police, the Stasi.

     The local police have been quick to employ the broad powers of
criminal investigation authorized by the NSL to oppress a range of civic,
human rights and even professional organizations, subjecting them to
unreasonable demands in alleged searches for evidence of their
                                    10
suspected, ill-defined offenses.         A leading example is the extensive


9  See Michael C. Davis, Beijing’s National Security Law and the Destruction of the
   Liberal Constitutional Order in Hong Kong, 2022 ACADEMIA SINICA L.J. (SPECIAL
   ISSUE) 21 (2022).
10 For critical analyses of the NSL, see, e.g., LYDIA WONG & THOMAS E. KELLOGG,
   HONG KONG’S NATIONAL SECURITY LAW: A HUMAN RIGHTS AND RULE OF LAW
   ANALYSIS, GEORGETOWN CENTER FOR ASIAN LAW (Feb. 2021), https://www.law.
   georgetown.edu/law-asia/wp-content/uploads/sites/31/2021/02/GT-HK-Report-Access
   ible.pdf; LYDIA WONG, THOMAS E. KELLOGG & ERIC YANHO LAI, HONG KONG’S
   NATIONAL SECURITY LAW AND THE RIGHT TO FAIR TRIAL: A GCAL BRIEFING PAPER,
   GEORGETOWN CENTER FOR ASIAN LAW (June 28, 2021), https://www.law.georgetown.
   edu/law-asia/wp-content/uploads/sites/31/2021/06/HongKongNSLRightToFairTrial.
   pdf; THOMAS E. KELLOGG & ERIC YANHO LAI, THE TONG YING-KIT NSL VERDICT: AN
   INTERNATIONAL AND COMPARATIVE LAW ANALYSIS, GEORGETOWN CENTER FOR ASIAN
   LAW (Oct. 20, 2021), https://www.law.georgetown.edu/law-asia/wp-content/uploads/
   sites/31/2021/10/TongYingKitVerdictGCAL.pdf; Yu-Jie Chen, The National Security
   Law for Hong Kong: Infringements of Hong Kong’s Rule of Law and Human Rights,
   5(4) TAIWAN HUM. RTS. J. 131, 131-158 (2020); Johannes M.M. Chan, National
   Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong: One Year On, 2022 ACADEMIA SINICA L.J.
   (SPECIAL ISSUE) 39 (2022).
Hong Kong’s Transformed Criminal Justice System                                         7


notice sent to leaders of the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of Patriotic
Democratic Movements of China (Alliance), well-known for annually
organizing the famous mass protests commemorating Beijing’s June 4,
1989 massacre near Tiananmen Square. Ostensibly in pursuit of
suspected “collusion with foreigners”, this demand, which the police
reluctantly acknowledged to the public and then only in very general
terms, required the Alliance leaders to turn over a broad spectrum of
information about its foreign contacts, membership, operations and
          11
funding.       Despite the NSL’s assurance that it would not be applied
                12
retroactively,       the police demand for information was not limited to
information accumulated after the new law’s promulgation. Presumably
the Alliance leaders, in their legal resistance to this demand, will invoke
the principle of non-retroactivity. Certainly they should, in addition,
assert their privilege against self-incrimination, which the NSL also
                         13
purports to preserve.

      Criminal punishment is certain to follow if, for example, the
authorities find evidence of statements as apparently innocuous and
ambiguous as “Hong Kong, keep going” (jia you) and decide, in the
secret and unreviewable exercise of their discretion, that such statements
merit prosecution for a crime such as incitement to subversion or
secession. To be sure, Hong Kong’s vaunted independent court system,


11 Kenji Kawase, Hong Kong Police Probe June 4 Vigil Organizer for Foreign
   Collusion, NIKKEI ASIA (Aug. 25, 2021), https://asia.nikkei.com/Spotlight/Hong-
   Kong-security-law/Hong-Kong-police-probe-June-4-vigil-organizer-for-foreign-collu
   sion.
12 Respect Beijing’s Right to Protect National Security in Hong Kong, Leader Carrie Lam
   Tells UN Rights Council, HONG KONG FREE PRESS (June 30, 2020), https://hongkongfp.
   com/2020/06/30/respect-beijings-right-to-protect-national-security-in-hong-kong-leader-
   carrie-lam-tells-un-rights-council/.
13 NSL § 4 (H.K.).
8                                   《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



despite significant NSL restrictions discussed below, may ultimately
conclude that a proper interpretation of the law and the facts requires
acquittal of the accused. Yet that result might well not come until several
years after arrest. In the interim, most NSL defendants will remain
incarcerated, since for NSL prosecutions the new law has replaced the
traditional common law rule that favors granting bail in most cases. In its
stead there is now what amounts to a prohibition against bail unless NSL
defendants can demonstrate that, if granted freedom under bail’s
constrained conditions, they will not “continue to commit acts
                                                                                 14
endangering national security”, a negative that is very difficult to prove.

      This evidently contradicts Hong Kong’s long-standing presumption
of innocence and the guarantees in the Basic Law and the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) that the NSL purports to
        15
respect.     It leaves most NSL suspects in jail during the slow processes
of completing investigation, considering indictment, preparing for trial
and, assuming conviction, undertaking appellate review. Thus most NSL
suspects, having been deprived of their physical liberty, their freedoms
of expression, and their employment, family and social life while
confined for years in unpleasant jail conditions, will suffer devastating
harm regardless of their case’s eventual outcome. This means that, win
or lose, the government succeeds in inflicting severe punishment by
merely launching a prosecution. That power has effectively served as a
desired official deterrent to many other would-be protesters against
dictatorship. This is another respect in which Hong Kong’s criminal



14 NSL § 42 (H.K.).
15 See Carole J. Petersen, Hong Kong’s First Conviction for Incitement to Secession:
    What Role for the ICCPR?, AMERICAN SOCIETY OF INTERNATIONAL LAW INSIGHTS
    (Oct. 13, 2021), https://www.asil.org/insights/volume/25/issue/22.
Hong Kong’s Transformed Criminal Justice System                                     9


justice has drawn closer to that in mainland China, where bail is
normally denied to criminal suspects absent special circumstances.

     The first thing that a NSL accused, whether or not detained, usually
does is to seek to retain qualified defense counsel. Article 35 of the Basic
Law guarantees the right to choose one’s defense counsel. However,
recent HKG changes in the local legal aid system have deprived suspects
of that right if, as is often the case, they need legal aid because they
cannot afford to pay the costs and fees of the SAR’s able but very
expensive lawyers. If suspects are eligible for legal aid and wish to take
advantage of it, they must now accept counsel assigned by the Legal Aid
Department, which, before the change, generally approved their free
choice of counsel and paid the bill. As knowledgeable Hong Kong
barristers have pointed out, the new legal aid system requiring recipient
suspects to accept government-assigned counsel is similar in practice to
that often prevailing in mainland China. There, criminal accused who
lack the funds or are considered “politically sensitive” are generally
denied the right to counsel of their own choosing. In Hong Kong not
only many NSL defendants, but also many of the 2,600 people currently
being prosecuted for pre-NSL offenses allegedly committed during the
anti-extradition protests of 2019, will have no choice but to accept
whatever lawyers are assigned by the government in the exercise of its
           16
discretion.



16 See Selina Cheng, Legal Aid Reform: Critics Fear Right to Choose Lawyer Will be
   Undermined but Hong Kong Gov’t Advisor Says Plan Will be ‘Fairer’, HONG KONG
   FREE PRESS (Oct. 25, 2021), https://hongkongfp.com/2021/10/25/legal-aid-reform-
   critics-fear-right-to-choose-lawyer-will-be-undermined-but-hong-kong-govt-advisor-
   says-plan-will-be-fairer. See also Tim Hamlett, Legal Aid: Another Respectable Hong
   Kong Institution Vandalised, HONG KONG FREE PRESS (Nov. 6, 2021), https://hongkong
   fp.com/2021/11/06/legal-aid-another-respectable-hong-kong-institution-vandalised.
10                                  《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



     This “reform” inevitably raises doubts about the experience and
vigor of the defense lawyers available to Hong Kong criminal
defendants who need legal aid. These doubts are increased by other
arrangements imposed by the “reform” that encourage the Legal Aid
Department to assign counsel who have until now not been very active
in undertaking controversial criminal cases. These arrangements appear
designed to end the perceived prominence of “the small number of firms
                                                            17
and barristers” that have specialized in such cases.             There is a clear
implication in these new arrangements that pro-establishment lawyers
are henceforth likely to be favored in the assignment process.

     A leading pro-establishment barrister, Executive Council member
Ronny Tong, told the press that the new system will be fairer to those
barristers in the Legal Aid roster who have not had a sufficient number
of assignments. When asked whether the new system will undermine the
rights of the accused, “Tong said they would have to accept what the
system allows if they rely on taxpayers’ money. They could pay from
                                                 18
their own pocket if they wished to choose”.

     Thanks to the NSL, there have also been disturbing changes in the
prosecutors’ office within the Hong Kong Department of Justice (DoJ).
Following arrest, the crucial decisions whether and on what grounds to
prosecute NSL cases are not made in accordance with customary DoJ
procedures but by a new secret group — the National Security
Prosecution Division — that functions within the DoJ but under the


17 See Cheng, supra note 16. See also Bernard Chan, Hong Kong Needs to Reform Legal
   Aid System to Prevent Further Abuse and Maintain Its Integrity, SOUTH CHINA
   MORNING POST (Nov. 5, 2021), https://www.scmp.com/comment/opinion/article/
   3154810/hong-kong-needs-reform-legal-aid-system-prevent-further-abuse-and.
18 See Cheng, supra note 16.
Hong Kong’s Transformed Criminal Justice System                                    11


                                                                                   19
guidance of the security officials imported from the mainland.
Amazingly, this arrangement excludes from the decision-making process
the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP), who serves under the DoJ’s
Secretary for Justice and is ordinarily the second most important official
in the DoJ. It even denies him knowledge of what this powerful group is
up to. Consequently, the incumbent Director of Public Prosecutions,
David Leung SC, resigned in protest and has been succeeded by a less
                                                                20
experienced but reportedly more compliant newcomer.

     A much more widely-noted distortion of Hong Kong’s pre-NSL
criminal process is the new law’s authorization of the Secretary for
Justice to deny a jury trial to defendants whose alleged NSL offense is
serious enough to warrant trial in the High Court. The NSL broadly
defines the circumstances that give the Secretary unreviewable
discretion to deprive defendants of this hallowed common law protection.
Given the immense unpopularity of the NSL in Hong Kong, the
Communist Party plainly fears that some members of any jury might
refuse to convict those accused of NSL offenses. Accordingly, in the first
NSL prosecution that went to trial the Secretary for Justice eliminated a
jury on the authorized ground that this was necessary in order to avoid
                                               21
possible harm to jurors or their families.          This was a claim that she did
not offer any facts to support and is a concern that in many jurisdictions
is often alleviated by government protection of jurors.




19 See Clarke, supra note 8.
20 Jennifer Creery, Hong Kong’s Director of Public Prosecutions David Leung Resigns
   over Differences with Justice Secretary, HONG KONG FREE PRESS (Aug. 3, 2020),
   https://hongkongfp.com/2020/08/03/hong-kongs-director-of-public-prosecutions-david-
   leung-resigns-over-differences-with-justice-secretary.
21 See Petersen, supra note 15.
12                                    《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



     In place of the jury in such NSL prosecutions, three judges are
assigned to decide the case. Yet those NSL judges are not chosen from
among the large number of available judges by lot, random selection or
some other impartial method. They must be selected by the Chief Justice
from a secret, small list approved by Hong Kong’s Chief Executive, after
                                                          22
written agreement with her Beijing advisors.                   This arrangement was
obviously designed to exclude judges whom the authorities fear might
prove to be too independent to assure the desired outcome. Moreover,
appointment of these designated NSL judges is only for an initial one-
year term and subject to annual renewal as well as removal at any time
for making a statement or engaging in conduct that, in the view of the
                                                          23
Chief Executive, “endangers national security”.                This keeps supposedly
independent judges on an embarrassingly short leash. Removal from the
list of designated judges following a disappointing decision or a
disapproved statement could be damaging to their career and reputation.

     The judges in the first two NSL trials concluded vindicated the faith
invested in them. In the first case, the court might well have decided that
the evidence did not prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused,
in ramming his motorcycle through barriers and injuring policemen, had
violated the NSL as well as the law against reckless driving. The slogans
on the banners he displayed were susceptible of several interpretations,
as certain witnesses indicated, but the judges chose to adopt the
interpretation that they deemed sufficient to warrant NSL conviction and
                         24
harsher punishment.           A jury, of course, might well have differed.
Moreover, in their opinion justifying their decision, the panel, contrary to


22 NSL §§ 44, 46 (H.K.). See also Clarke, supra note 8.
23 NSL §§ 44, 46 (H.K.).
24 See Petersen, supra note 15.
Hong Kong’s Transformed Criminal Justice System                                13


the guarantees in the NSL itself as well as the Joint Declaration and the
Basic Law, failed to consider the provisions of the ICCPR that protect
                                               25
the freedoms of expression involved.                In the second trial, which
involved only issues of free speech and was tried in the Magistrate’s
court, the anointed judge also decided that the imprecise offending
language violated the ambiguous and broad NSL provisions beyond a
                      26
reasonable doubt.          Again, a jury might well have refused to convict.

     Despite the substantial expense of conducting appeals without
Legal Aid assistance, I hope that both cases can eventually reach Hong
Kong’s Court of Final Appeal (CFA) and be argued by counsel of
defendant’s choice. Yet the NSL regime has placed even high judges
under pressures that impinge on their impartiality, as a variety of
developments suggest.

     First of all, it is unclear whether appellate judges who have not been
designated to serve as NSL judges can take part in the consideration of
                                                                     27
NSL appeals. The NSL appears to preclude their participation.             Actual
court practice to date is unknown due to the non-transparency of
procedural details.

     Beijing-sponsored Hong Kong newspapers incessantly attack those
judges whose decisions displease them and have even reminded the
courts that, if they make unacceptable decisions, as regarding NSL bail
issues, the new law permits the Beijing-staffed Office for Safeguarding
National Security, on its own, to transfer the prosecution from the Hong


25 Hong Kong v. Tong Ying Kit, HCCC 280/2020 (C.F.I. July 27, 2021) (Legal
   Reference System) (H.K.).
26 Hong Kong v. Ma Chun Man, DCCC 122/2021 (D.C. Oct. 25, 2021) (Legal
   Reference System) (H.K.).
27 NSL § 44 (H.K.).
14                                  《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



Kong legal system to that of the mainland for processing in accordance
                                                         28
with the PRC’s much more repressive procedures.               This widely-feared
“nuclear option”, which Beijing has wisely not yet exercised, constitutes
a sword of Damocles over SAR justice. Its exercise would in effect
accomplish the extradition to the mainland that two million Hong Kong
protesters successfully resisted in 2019, but without even the limited
protection that the proposed extradition process would have provided.

     After receiving published criticism, one judge with important
administrative responsibilities was moved without explanation to a
                                                  29
better-paid but less consequential position.           The Chief Justice, soon
                                                                                30
after the NSL’s promulgation, openly met with the Chief Executive.
Their meeting undoubtedly dealt with conventional administrative topics,
but failure of the government to confirm the content of their private
discussion hardly inspired confidence in judicial independence of
political influence.

     The career path for judicial promotions is also now firmly in the
hands of political powers. The SAR’s Chief Secretary, whose duty it is to
ensure that only “patriots” administer Hong Kong, is also in charge of
the judiciary portfolio within the Hong Kong Government. It is his
responsibility to table or not to table an individual’s name to the
Legislative Council for senior judicial appointment. There is nothing to

28 NSL §§ 55-56 (H.K.).
29 Kelly Ho, Hong Kong Judiciary Dismisses Complaints Against Magistrate over 6
   Protest Rulings, HONG KONG FREE PRESS (Oct. 8, 2020), https://hongkongfp.
   com/2020/10/08/hong-kong-judiciary-dismisses-complaints-against-magistrate-over-
   6-protest-rulings.
30 Chris Lau, Hong Kong Leader Carrie Lam Denies Interference Suggestion, After
   Reportedly Meeting Chief Justice Ahead of Jimmy Lai Hearing, SOUTH CHINA
   MORNING POST (Feb. 2, 2021), https://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/politics/
   article/3120192/hong-kong-leader-carrie-lam-categorically-denies.
Hong Kong’s Transformed Criminal Justice System                                     15


stop him from declining to put forward a name on national security
grounds. Hong Kong legal circles have already been rife with reports of
the exclusion of highly qualified candidates from judicial appointment
because they were deemed too liberal by the pro-Beijing establishment.
Maria Yuen, the able wife of the former chief justice, was widely
expected to be appointed to the CFA, and David Leung, the recently-
resigned director of public prosecutions, was thought to be nominated to
the High Court, but they both failed to pass the new political tests. The
deliberations of the government-dominated judicial appointments
                                                 31
commission are shielded from the public.

     Not only judicial promotions and appointments are at stake. The
tenure of sitting judges itself is in doubt in various ways. Early on, a
distinguished Australian judge resigned from his service as one of the
non-permanent foreign judges on the CFA due to concerns about the
                                           32
NSL that he declined to articulate.             Furthermore, it is far from clear
what role, if any, the remaining non-permanent foreign judges on the
                                                                       33
CFA will be allowed to play in reviewing NSL convictions.                   Have they
been designated among the “safe” NSL judges? In these circumstances
one has to wonder how free Hong Kong’s higher judges feel in
interpreting the ambiguous complexities of the NSL that cry out for
restrained clarification in deference to civil liberties and their obligations
under the ICCPR.


31 Judicial Officers Recommendation Commission Ordinance, (2015) Cap. 92, 4, § 3 (H.K.).
32 Greg Torode & Swati Pandey, Australian Judge Quits Hong Kong Court, Citing
   National Security Law, REUTERS (Sept. 18, 2020), https://www.reuters.com/article/us-
   hongkong-security-judges-idUSKBN26912R.
33 Dennis W. H. Kwok & Elizabeth Donkervoort, The Risks for International Business
   under the Hong Kong National Security Law, ASH CENTER FOR DEMOCRATIC
   GOVERNANCE AND INNOVATION (July 2021), https://ash.harvard.edu/publications/
   risks-international-business-under-hong-kong-national-security-law.
16                                《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



     Even more serious is the recent weaponization of the oath-taking
system established through the interpretation of Article 104 of the Basic
Law and the adoption of the principle that “only patriots can administer
Hong Kong”. All public office holders including all judges are required
to take the oath of loyalty to the SAR. Those who, after a summary
process, may be found to have broken that oath will have no recourse
and will bear the consequences, including a clawback of their salaries
and loss of their pensions. This has not yet happened but, as one
knowledgeable recent participant in Hong Kong political-legal affairs
remarked to me: “If I put a loaded gun to your heard, I don’t need to pull
the trigger to send a message”!

     Moreover, the scope of independent judicial adjudication has
shrunk. Contrary to the expectations generated among many observers
by the Joint Declaration and the Basic Law, even the CFA lacks the final
power to overturn NSL convictions on the ground that the constitutional
rights of the accused have been violated. Even before promulgation of
the NSL, the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress
made it clear that ultimate constitutional determinations are its exclusive
                                              34
prerogative, and the NSL confirmed this.           Thus Hong Kong NSL
defendants cannot hope for final vindication of their constitutional
claims by an independent judiciary, since that possibility has been
eliminated.

     Most of the above adverse changes to Hong Kong’s criminal justice
system are the direct result of the NSL regime. At the same time,
numerous adverse changes are also taking place as an indirect result of
the new regime. Various examples are beginning to accumulate. Not


34 NSL § 65 (H.K.).
Hong Kong’s Transformed Criminal Justice System                                      17


long after the NSL’s promulgation, a Hong Kong court, when dealing
with the bail application of the suspect in a prosecution for violation of
the local pre-NSL anti-sedition legislation, denied bail by explicitly
applying the NSL’s presumption against bail rather than the traditional
                           35
common law standard.

      Recent legislation overwhelmingly adopted by Hong Kong’s
Legislative Council, now purged of effective democratic opposition, has
also endorsed some alarming changes in criminal procedure. An
amendment to the city’s censorship regime authorizes censorship agency
inspectors, who are not police, to enter and search premises without a
warrant when trying to halt an unauthorized film screening if it is “not
                                                 36
reasonably practical to obtain a warrant”.            More astonishing is the new
amendment to The Personal Data (Privacy) Ordinance that empowers
the Privacy Commissioner for Personal Data to initiate and conduct a
criminal investigation on his own, again without involving the police, in
assessing whether the new crime of disclosing personal data without
consent, with an intent to inflict psychological harm, may have been
committed. It also permits the Privacy Commissioner to access any
electronic device without a warrant “under urgent circumstances”.
Moreover, the amendment even authorizes the Privacy Commissioner to
                                                                               37
initiate prosecutions without consulting the Department of Justice!



35 Hong Kong v. Tam Tak Chi, DCCC 927, 928 & 930/2020 (D.C. Apr. 9, 2021) (Legal
   Reference System) (H.K.).
36 Film Censorship Ordinance, (2021) Cap. 392, 8-14, § 23(3C)(b) (H.K.). See also Kelly
   Ho, Hong Kong Passes Bill to Censor Films ‘Contrary’ to China’s National
   Security — HK$1m Fine, 3 Years in Jail for Offenders, HONG KONG FREE PRESS (Oct.
   27, 2021), https://hongkongfp.com/2021/10/27/hong-kong-passes-bill-to-censor-films
   -contrary-to-chinas-national-security-hk1m-fine-3-years-jail-for-offenders.
37 Personal Data (Privacy) Ordinance, (2021) Cap. 486, 9-10, 9A-2, §§ 64C, 66D-I (H.K.).
18                              《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



     One could go on with an even lengthier account of the many ways
that the NSL era has transformed Hong Kong criminal justice. Yet
enough has been said to demonstrate that the silence that has prevailed
over the previously hyperactive Hong Kong political community since
the NSL’s enactment cannot largely be attributed to a sudden preference
for its traditional preoccupation with stability and security. People now
in fear want to avoid arbitrary punishment. The NSL era’s
transformation of criminal justice is proving effective.
Hong Kong’s Transformed Criminal Justice System                      19




                               References

Chan, Johannes M.M. 2022. National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong:
     One Year On. Academia Sinica Law Journal 2022 Special Issue:39-
     101.
Chen, Yu-Jie. 2020. The National Security Law for Hong Kong:
     Infringements of Hong Kong’s Rule of Law and Human Rights.
     Taiwan Human Rights Journal 5(4):131-158.
Clarke, Donald. 2020. Hong Kong’s National Security Law: An
     Assessment. In China Leadership Monitor, https://www.prcleader.
     org/clarke.
Davis, Michael C. 2022. Beijing’s National Security Law and the
     Destruction of the Liberal Constitutional Order in Hong Kong.
     Academia Sinica Law Journal 2022 Special Issue:21-37.
Hui, Victoria Tin-bor. 2022. The Bad Birth and Premature Death of “One
     Country, Two Systems” in Hong Kong. Academia Sinica Law
     Journal 2022 Special Issue:159-194.
Kellogg, Thomas E., and Eric Yanho Lai. 2021. The Tong Ying-kit NSL
     Verdict: An International and Comparative Law Analysis. In
     Georgetown Center for Asian Law, https://www.law.georgetown.
     edu/law-asia/wp-content/uploads/sites/31/2021/10/TongYingKitVer
     dictGCAL.pdf.
Kwok, Dennis W. H., and Elizabeth Donkervoort. 2021. The Risks for
     International Business under the Hong Kong National Security Law.
     In Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation,
     https://ash.harvard.edu/publications/risks-international-business-
     under-hong-kong-national-security-law.
Link, Perry. 2021. The CCP’s Culture of Fear. In The New York Review,
20                               《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



     https://www.nybooks.com/articles/2021/10/21/chinese-communist-
     party-ccp-culture-fear/.
Petersen, Carole J. 2021. Hong Kong’s First Conviction for Incitement
     to Secession: What Role for the ICCPR?. In American Society of
     International Law Insights, https://www.asil.org/insights/volume/
     25/issue/22.
Wong, Lydia, and Thomas E. Kellogg. 2021. Hong Kong’s National
     Security Law: A Human Rights and Rule of Law Analysis. In
     Georgetown Center for Asian Law, https://www.law.georgetown.
     edu/law-asia/wp-content/uploads/sites/31/2021/02/GT-HK-Report-
     Accessible.pdf.
Wong, Lydia, Thomas E. Kellogg, and Eric Yanho Lai. 2021. Hong
     Kong’s National Security Law and the Right to Fair Trial: A GCAL
     Briefing   Paper.   In     Georgetown   Center   for   Asian   Law,
     https://www.law.georgetown.edu/law-asia/wp-content/uploads/sites
     /31/2021/06/HongKongNSLRightToFairTrial.pdf.
