    Hong Kong’s Changing Rule of Law
Academia Sinica Law Journal                                                                195
2022 Special Issue, pp. 195-243 (May 2022)




          Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of
                 Conflict Resolution?
 Lessons from “One Country, Two Systems” in Hong Kong

                                                             ＊
                                 Carole J. Petersen


                                         Abstract
     For those who study comparative models of autonomy, Hong Kong
has provided a fascinating but increasingly pessimistic case study. On
one hand, the Sino-British Joint Declaration promised that Hong Kong
would enjoy an exceptionally high degree of autonomy, including a
separate currency, a separate customs regime, and an independent
judiciary with the power of final adjudication. In practice, however, “One
Country, Two Systems” (OCTS) has fallen well short of expectations
and Hong Kong has been plagued by escalating conflicts, primarily over
Beijing’s refusal to allow local democracy. In 2020, after a sustained
period of anti-government protests, the People’s Republic of China (PRC)
imposed a sweeping National Security Law, which has profoundly
affected Hong Kong’s local press, educational institutions, and civil
society. In 2021, Beijing went further and overhauled the election system
for Hong Kong’s Legislative Council, reversing the limited democracy
reforms that had been achieved. As a result, the British Government has


＊     Professor, William S. Richardson School of Law, University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa.
      Professor Petersen taught law in Hong Kong from 1989 to 2006 and is a former
      Director of the Centre for Comparative and Public Law at the Faculty of Law,
      University of Hong Kong. She thanks the William S. Richardson School of Law for
      supporting the research that led to this article and the journal’s editors and staff for
      their editorial assistance.
      Online: http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/32903022.pdf.
196                               《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）


accused the PRC of violating the Joint Declaration. Many foreign
governments have also stopped treating Hong Kong as a separate
jurisdiction for the purposes of trade and extradition agreements,
reasoning that it is no longer sufficiently autonomous to justify separate
treatment from the PRC. All of this has occurred within the first 25 years
of what was supposed to be a 50-year period of “no change” in Hong
Kong. While it is tempting to attribute the demise of OCTS to the
authoritarian nature of the PRC, this article explores an alternative
theory — that weaknesses in OCTS as a model of autonomy are also to
blame. The article draws upon comparative studies of autonomous
regions and argues that the United Nations should have played a greater
role in the negotiations for reunification, so as to protect the right of a
colonized people to practice at least internal self-determination.

KEYWORDS: Hong Kong, China, “One Country, Two Systems”,
          territorial  autonomy,   internal   self-determination,
          decolonization, dispute resolution, national security,
          human rights.


                                  Contents

 I.     Comparative Perspectives on “One Country, Two Systems”
 II.    The Joint Declaration: An Inadequate Foundation for Autonomy
 III.   The Basic Law: A Deceptive Institutional Framework
 IV.    Defense, National Security, and Article 23 of the Basic Law
 V.     Conclusion




I. Comparative Perspectives on “One Country, Two
   Systems”

        The terms “territorial autonomy” and “regional autonomy” are used
to describe a wide variety of arrangements that enable a subnational
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?                         197


region to practice self-government and organize its own affairs, without
undue interference from the central authorities. Although studies of
territorial autonomy can include federal systems, this article focusses on
asymmetrical arrangements, in which the “autonomy” is not enjoyed by
all regions within the larger state. Asymmetrical autonomy arrangements
have been devised for different purposes, sometimes to reorganize the
relationship between a colonial power and a former colony and
sometimes to accommodate a community that hoped to separate itself
from the larger colony at the time of independence. It is often proposed
                                    1
as a tool of conflict resolution. For example, it may be used to resolve
disputes over territory or to dampen desires for secession by providing a
form of “internal self-determination” to a region without threatening the
                                              2
larger state’s right to territorial integrity.

     For those who study territorial autonomy as a tool of conflict
resolution, Hong Kong has provided a fascinating case study. The Sino-
                            3
British Joint Declaration initially appeared to promise an exceptionally
high degree of autonomy and Hong Kong was well equipped to exercise
it, as an international financial center with its own sophisticated legal
system. Indeed, during the transition period (1984-1997), some experts


1 Marc Weller, Introduction, in ASYMMETRIC AUTONOMY AND THE SETTLEMENT OF
  ETHNIC CONFLICTS 1, 1-14 (Marc Weller & Katherine Nobbs eds., 2011) (noting that
  asymmetric autonomy has been used as a principal mode of settlement of self-
  determination and ethnic conflicts in the past two decades).
2 See, e.g., Stefan Wolff & Marc Weller, Self-determination and Autonomy: A
  Conceptual Introduction, in AUTONOMY, SELF-GOVERNANCE AND CONFLICT
  RESOLUTION: INNOVATIVE APPROACHES TO INSTITUTIONAL DESIGN IN DIVIDED
  SOCIETIES 1, 1-25 (Stefan Wolff & Marc Weller eds., 2005).
3 Joint Declaration of the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
  Northern Ireland and the Government of the People’s Republic of China on the
  Question of Hong Kong, China-U.K. [hereinafter Joint Declaration], Dec. 19, 1984,
  1399 U.N.T.S. 33.
198                                  《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



suggested that “One Country, Two Systems” (OCTS) might provide a
                                                                  4
model for power-sharing in other disputed territories. Of course, by
that time, it was well known that Beijing hoped to apply the model to at
                                           5                  6
least two other territories, Macau             and Taiwan. Hong Kong was,
therefore, considered a “showcase” in the drive of the People’s Republic
                                       7
of China (PRC) for reunification. In theory, the goal of applying OCTS
more broadly would provide Beijing with an incentive to comply with
                         8
the Joint Declaration.



4   See Herbert J. Hansell, Robert E. Lutz, James V. Feinerman, David H. Popper &
    Hurst Hannum, The Hong Kong Accord as a Model for Dealing with Other Disputed
    Territories, 80 AM. SOC’Y INT’L L. PROC. 348, 348-68 (1986); and ANTONIO CASSESE,
    SELF-DETERMINATION OF PEOPLES: A LEGAL REAPPRAISAL 357 (1995) (citing a variety
    of sources for the proposition that “it has been contended that the solution agreed
    upon in 1984 concerning Hong Kong constitutes a useful model for dealing with
    disputed territories”).
5   Macau was reunified with the PRC in 1999 under a model of autonomy that is similar,
    on paper, to that used for Hong Kong. However, the dynamics of the Macau-PRC
    relationship have been different. See Paulo Cardinal, Macau: Transformation of an
    Historic Autonomy, in PRACTISING SELF-GOVERNMENT: A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF
    AUTONOMOUS REGIONS 383, 383-411 (Yash Ghai & Sophia Woodman eds., 2013);
    and Paulo Cardinal, Rule of Law Resilience: Comparative Perspectives from Macau,
    in CHINA’S NATIONAL SECURITY: ENDANGERING HONG KONG’S RULE OF LAW? 87, 87-
    100 (Cora Chan & Fiona de Londras eds., 2020).
6   See Byron S.J. Weng, Mainland China, Taiwan, and Hong Kong as International
    Actors, in HONG KONG’S REUNION WITH CHINA: THE GLOBAL DIMENSIONS 40, 40-78
    (Gerard A. Postiglione & James T.H. Tang eds., 1997); and Yash Ghai, Hong Kong’s
    Autonomy: Dialects of Powers and Institutions, in PRACTISING SELF-GOVERNMENT: A
    COMPARATIVE STUDY OF AUTONOMOUS REGIONS 315, 320 (Yash Ghai & Sophia
    Woodman eds., 2013).
7   Johannes M.M. Chan, Asymmetry in the Face of Heavily Disproportionate Power
    Relations: Hong Kong, in ASYMMETRIC AUTONOMY AND THE SETTLEMENT OF ETHNIC
    CONFLICTS 121, 121-47 (Marc Weller & Katherine Nobbs eds., 2011).
8   Alvin Y. So, Social Protests, Legitimacy Crisis, and the Impetus toward Soft
    Authoritarianism in the Hong Kong SAR, in THE FIRST TUNG CHEE-HWA
    ADMINISTRATION: THE FIRST FIVE YEARS OF THE HONG KONG SPECIAL
    ADMINISTRATIVE REGION 399, 403 (Siu-kai Lau ed., 2002) (describing the “inverted
    Taiwan factor” as a “blessing” for Hong Kong).
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?                               199


     Yet OCTS in Hong Kong has fallen well short of initial
expectations. The territory has been plagued by escalating conflicts,
primarily over the pace of local democracy reforms. Following the
Occupy Central movement of 2014, Beijing began adopting a far more
interventionist approach, frequently being accused of stifling civil
            9
liberties. On June 30, 2020, after a sustained period of antigovernment
         10
protests,       the PRC imposed a sweeping National Security Law (NSL)
in the territory, claiming that Hong Kong had failed to fulfill its
constitutional obligation to enact local legislation to protect national
         11
security.       The NSL has had a profound impact on the local press,
                                                   12
educational institutions, and civil society.            Independent human rights
experts from the United Nations (UN) now regularly express concerns
                                                                                13
regarding civil liberties and the right to fair trial in Hong Kong.                   In


9  Carole J. Petersen & Alvin Y.H. Cheung, Academic Freedom and Critical Speech in
   Hong Kong: China’s Response to Occupy Central and the Future of “One Country,
   Two Systems”, 42 N. CAROLINA J. INT’L L. 665, 665-727 (2017).
10 For analysis of the anti-government protests, which began as peaceful expressions of
   opposition to a government proposal to amend Hong Kong’s legal framework
   regarding extradition, see Albert H.Y. Chen, A Perfect Storm: Hong Kong-Mainland
   Rendition of Fugitive Offenders, 49 HKLJ 419, 419-30 (2019); and Cora Chan,
   Demise of “One Country, Two Systems”? Reflections on the Hong Kong Rendition
   Saga, 49 HKLJ 447, 447-57 (2019).
11 For an unofficial English translation, see HONG KONG GOVERNMENT E-GAZETTE (July
   3, 2020), https://www.gld.gov.hk/egazette/pdf/20202448e/egn2020244872.pdf (last
   visited Nov. 20, 2021). See also Decision of the National People’s Congress on
   Establishing and Improving the Legal System and Enforcement Mechanisms for the
   Hong Kong Special Administrative Region to Safeguard National Security, adopted at
   the Third Session of the Thirteenth National People’s Congress (NPC) on 28 May
   2020, https://www.elegislation.gov.hk/hk/A215.
12 LYDIA WONG & THOMAS E. KELLOGG, HONG KONG’S NATIONAL SECURITY LAW: A
   HUMAN RIGHTS AND RULE OF LAW ANALYSIS, GEORGETOWN CENTER FOR ASIAN LAW
   (Feb. 2021), https://www.law.georgetown.edu/law-asia/wp-content/uploads/sites/31/
   2021/02/GT-HK-Report-Accessible.pdf. See Appendix C (listing arrests, including
   many arising from entirely peaceful speech and political activity).
13 See, e.g., United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Hong
200                                   《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



2021, Beijing went further and overhauled the local election system for
the Legislative Council, reversing the limited democracy reforms that
                            14
had been implemented.

      As a result of these developments, the British government has
                                                            15
accused Beijing of violating the Joint Declaration.              Many other foreign
governments have also stopped treating Hong Kong as a separate
jurisdiction for the purposes of trade and extradition agreements, after
concluding that it is no-longer sufficiently autonomous to justify that
                      16
separate treatment.        All of this has occurred within the first 25 years of
what Beijing promised would be a 50-year period of “no change” in
               17
Hong Kong,          greatly damaging the PRC’s international reputation.
Commentators now openly question whether the PRC can be trusted to
                                         18
honor its international agreements.


   Kong: Arrests under Security Law, a Serious Concern, UN NEWS (Oct. 12, 2021),
   https://news.un.org/en/story/2021/10/1102882.
14 For a summary, see Explainer: How Beijing Cracked down on Hong Kong’s Elections,
   HONG KONG FREE PRESS (Mar. 31, 2021), https://hongkongfp.com/2021/03/31/
   explainer-how-beijing-cracked-down-on-hong-kongs-elections/. For links to the NPC
   Standing Committee’s Decision and the local legislation implementing it, see HONG
   KONG GOVERNMENT, IMPROVE ELECTORAL SYSTEM: ENSURE PATRIOTS
   ADMINISTERING HONG KONG, https://www.cmab.gov.hk/improvement/en/home/index.
   html (last visited Nov. 15, 2021).
15 See, e.g., GOV. UK, SECRETARY FOR STATE FOR FOREIGN AND COMMONWEALTH, SIX-
   MONTHLY REPORT ON HONG KONG: 1 JANUARY TO 30 JUNE 2021 (Dec. 14, 2021),
   https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/six-monthly-report-on-hong-kong-janua
   ry-to-june-2021/six-monthly-report-on-hong-kong-1-january-to-30-june-2021.
16 For more details on the NSL and the international community’s reaction, see Carole J.
   Petersen, The Disappearing Firewall: International Consequences of Beijing’s
   Decision to Impose a National Security Law and Operate National Security
   Institutions in Hong Kong, 50 HKLJ 633, 633-56 (2020).
17 Joint Declaration, para. 3(12).
18 See, e.g., Robert D. Williams, International Law with Chinese Characteristics:
   Beijing and the “Rules-Based” Global Order, BROOKINGS INSTITUTION (Oct. 2020),
   https://www.brookings.edu/research/international-law-with-chinese-characteristics-
   beijing-and-the-rules-based-global-order/.
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?                          201


     It is tempting to conclude that the demise of OCTS stems from the
                                                                     19
very nature of the PRC and the Chinese Communist Party.                   Perhaps it
is simply impossible for a small liberal enclave to survive as an
“autonomous region” within a large and increasingly powerful
authoritarian state. Under this theory, the specific provisions of the Joint
Declaration and the Hong Kong Basic Law were largely irrelevant
because it was just a matter of time before Beijing would curtail civil
liberties, autonomy, and local democracy. If this explanation is correct
then the main lesson from the Hong Kong case study is that an
authoritarian regime should not be trusted if it promises to grant
autonomy to a region. Of course, that would be a difficult lesson to apply
in practice because political systems are not static. Countries that are
considered liberal democracies today may become authoritarian over
     20
time.

     This article explores an alternative theory — that the escalating
conflicts and ultimate destruction of Hong Kong’s autonomy are not
entirely due to the PRC’s authoritarian nature. Rather, the collapse of
OCTS can also be attributed to weaknesses in the model of autonomy,
which might have been avoided had the UN played a greater role in the
negotiations and protected the right of a colonized people to practice at
least internal self-determination.



19 See, e.g., Keith Richburg, One Country, Two Systems Was Always Doomed to Fail,
   FINANCIAL REVIEW (Aug. 19, 2019), https://www.afr.com/world/asia/one-country-
   two-systems-was-always-doomed-to-fail-20190818-p52i9r.
20 See, e.g., Tom Ginsburg, Aziz Z. Huq & Mila Versteeg, The Coming Demise of
   Liberal Constitutionalism?, 85 U. CHI. L. REV. 239, 239-55 (2018); ANNE APPLEBAUM,
   TWILIGHT OF DEMOCRACY: THE SEDUCTIVE LURE OF AUTHORITARIANISM (2020); and
   LEE MORGENBESSER, THE RISE OF SOPHISTICATED AUTHORITARIANISM IN SOUTHEAST
   ASIA (2020).
202                                   《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



      Comparative studies of territorial autonomy can help to identify
factors that are associated with the successful practice of autonomy.
They confirm what we would expect to be the case — that it is easier for
a region to practice autonomy inside a state that has a tradition of
                                21
democracy and rule of law.           But studies have also identified additional
factors that correlate positively with the practice of autonomy, which can
be summarized as follows: (1) international involvement (during the
negotiations for autonomy and thereafter); (2) democratic participation
from the autonomous region itself (during the negotiations for autonomy
and thereafter); (3) a clear division of powers with constitutional
entrenchment; and (4) independent mechanisms for consultation and
                     22
dispute resolution.       The remainder of this article assesses the extent to
which OCTS embraced these positive factors, focusing first on the Joint
Declaration itself and then on the Hong Kong Basic Law, which is Hong
                                                                          23
Kong’s constitutional instrument and a national law of the PRC.




21 Sophia Woodman & Yash Ghai, Comparative Perspectives on Institutional
   Frameworks for Autonomy, in PRACTISING SELF-GOVERNMENT: A COMPARATIVE
   STUDY OF AUTONOMOUS REGIONS 449, 457 (Yash Ghai & Sophia Woodman eds.,
   2013) (noting that communist states, including the USSR (Union of Soviet Socialist
   Republics) and the PRC, have a poor record of allowing autonomy to be practiced).
22 These factors are summarized from: Woodman & Ghai, supra note 21; see Yash Ghai,
   Autonomy as a Strategy for Diffusing Conflict, in INTERNATIONAL CONFLICT
   RESOLUTION AFTER THE COLD WAR 483, 483-530 (Paul C. Stern & Daniel Duckman
   eds., 2000); and HURST HANNUM, AUTONOMY, SOVEREIGNTY, AND SELF-
   DETERMINATION: THE ACCOMMODATION OF CONFLICTING RIGHTS (rev. ed. 1996).
23 The Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s
   Republic of China [hereinafter Basic Law], Apr. 4, 1990, effective July 1, 1997,
   https://www.basiclaw.gov.hk/en/basiclaw/index.html.
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?                                203


II. The Joint Declaration: An Inadequate Foundation
    for Autonomy

      Two of the key factors associated with the successful practice of
autonomy are international involvement and democratic participation,
both during the negotiations for autonomy and thereafter. These factors
were largely absent in the development of OCTS, creating significant
flaws in the model of autonomy that was ultimately adopted.

      As is often the case with autonomy arrangements, OCTS began
with a territorial dispute. From the perspective of the UK, Hong Kong
was a British colony, which is why it was initially placed on the list of
                                                                                        24
non-self-governing territories maintained by the United Nations (UN).
This created an expectation that Hong Kong, as a colonized people,
                                                                      25
would eventually exercise a right to self-determination.                   It also meant
that the UK, as the colonial power, had a duty to report to the UN on the
                                                                26
development of self-government in the territory.                     According to the
principles stated in General Assembly Resolution 1541, Hong Kong
should not have been removed from that list until it attained “a full
measure” of self-government. Normally, that occurs when a colonized
people vote for one of three options: (1) emergence as a sovereign


24 See, e.g., Nihal Jayawickrama, The Right of Self-Determination — A Time for
   Reinvention and Renewal, 57 SASK. L. REV. 1, 16 (1993); and Carole J. Petersen, Not
   an Internal Affair: Hong Kong’s Right to Autonomy and Self-Determination under
   International Law, 49 HKLJ 883, 883-904 (2019).
25 U.N. Charter art. 73; G.A. Res. 1514 (XV), Declaration on the Granting of
   Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples (Dec. 14, 1960) [hereinafter G.A.
   Res. 1514].
26 UN G.A. Res. 1541 (XV), Principles Which Should Guide Members in Determining
   Whether or not an Obligation Exists to Transmit the Information Called for under
   Article 73e of the Charter, at Principles I, II and IV (Dec. 15, 1960) [hereinafter G.A.
   Res. 1541].
204                                   《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



independent state; (2) free association with an independent state; or (3)
                                                27
integration with an independent state.               Options (2) and (3) are only
considered acceptable when consistent with the freely expressed wishes
of the territory’s peoples, acting with “full knowledge of the change in
their status, their wishes having been expressed through informed and
democratic processes, impartially conducted and based on universal
                   28
adult suffrage.”        According to the International Court of Justice, this
right to self-determination for a colonized people was already a
crystalized norm of customary international law by 1960, which means
                                                                            29
that it was binding on all states, including the UK and the PRC.

      The conflict arose because the PRC had a very different view of
Hong Kong’s legal status. From its perspective, Hong Kong was not
covered by General Assembly Resolutions 1514 and 1541 because it was
located on Chinese territory, which had been unjustly occupied by the
        30
British.     Arguing that Hong Kong (and also Macau) belonged to “the
category of questions resulting from the series of unequal treaties left
over by history, treaties which the imperialists imposed on China,” the
PRC requested, in 1971, that both territories be removed from the UN’s
                                           31
list of non-self-governing territories.


27 Id. at Principles II and VI.
28 Id. at Principles VII-IX.
29 Legal Consequences of the Separation of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in
   1965, Advisory Opinion, 2019 I.C.J. 95, ¶¶ 150-156 (Feb. 25), https://www.icj-
   cij.org/public/files/case-related/169/169-20190225-ADV-01-00-EN.pdf (noting that
   G.A. Res. 1514, adopted on 14 December 1960, marked the crystallization of the right
   to self-determination in customary international law and that G.A. Res. 1541, adopted
   one day later, specified the “means of implementing” this right).
30 See generally PETER WESLEY-SMITH, UNEQUAL TREATY, 1898-1997: CHINA, GREAT
   BRITAIN, AND HONG KONG’S NEW TERRITORIES (rev. ed., 1998).
31 Nihal Jayawickrama, Public Law, in THE LAW IN HONG KONG, 1969-1989, at 49, 50-
   51 (Raymond Wacks ed., 1989) (quoting the Letter, dated 10 March 1972, from
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?                                  205


      Although Beijing’s “unequal treaties” claim was always dubious as
                                                                                   32
a matter of international law (due to the intertemporal doctrine ), the
PRC did have a competing territorial claim because the New Territories
section of Hong Kong was only leased to the UK for 99 years (until 30
               33
June 1997).         General Assembly Resolution 1514 also provides that
“[a]ny attempt aimed at the partial or total disruption of the national
unity and the territorial integrity of a country is incompatible with the
                                                     34
purposes and principles of the Charter.”                  While the interpretation of
                                 35
this paragraph is debated,            it has been cited for the proposition that a
colonized people’s right to self-determination must sometimes yield to a
sovereign state’s right to territorial integrity.

      What was disturbing (and arguably a violation of customary
international law) was the fact that the UN General Assembly approved
Beijing’s request to de-list Hong Kong without any legal analysis of its
status or consultation with the inhabitants. While this was partly due to
the fact that Beijing had strong political allies on the UN’s Committee on


   Ambassador Huang Hua, Permanent Representative of the PRC to the UN, to the
   Chairman of the UN Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
   Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
   Countries and Peoples).
32 According to the intertemporal doctrine, the validity of treaties is assessed by the law
   that existed when they were entered into (and the treaties by which the UK acquired
   control over Hong Kong would have been considered valid in the 1800s). See, e.g.,
   Roda Mushkat, Hong Kong’s Quest for Autonomy: A Theoretical Enforcement, in
   HONG KONG, CHINA AND 1997: ESSAYS IN LEGAL THEORY 307, 319-20 (Raymond
   Wacks ed., 1993).
33 In contrast, Hong Kong Island and Kowloon Peninsula were ceded “in perpetuity” to
   the UK.
34 G.A. Res. 1514, para. 6.
35 The debate centers on whether this paragraph simply prohibits dismemberment of
   colonial territories or whether it also protects territorial claims by neighboring states,
   such as the PRC. See JAMIE TRINIDAD, SELF-DETERMINATION IN DISPUTED COLONIAL
   TERRITORIES 21-69 (2018).
206                                   《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



Decolonization, the UK (and indeed the UN as a whole) also bears
responsibility. The UK could have argued that the obligations owed by a
colonial power to a dependent territory were “paramount” (the language
used in article 73 of the UN Charter) and must prevail over contradictory
obligations under a bilateral agreement, such as the lease of the New
             36
Territories.      But the UK raised no objections and the recommendation
to de-list Hong Kong was therefore never discussed in the General
Assembly. Instead, it was buried in a lengthy report and summarily
approved. Yet Hong Kong’s status as a British dependent territory
                                                                      37
continued to be recognized by the UN, right up until 1997.

      Of course, even if Hong Kong had remained on the UN’s list of
non-self-governing territories, Beijing would have continued to assert its
territorial claim and Hong Kong might well have become an
autonomous region of the PRC. By 1970, the General Assembly had
recognized the possibility of a “fourth option” for colonized peoples,
                                                                                     38
which was “any other political status freely chosen by the people.”
This could have included the option of becoming an autonomous region
within the PRC. But if the process of decolonization had been overseen
by the UN then it would have been a far more open process, with greater
participation by the people of Hong Kong and recognition of their right


36 U.N. Charter arts. 73 and 103 (providing that “in the event of a conflict between the
   obligations of the Members of the United Nations under the present Charter and their
   obligations under any other international agreement, their obligations under the
   present Charter shall prevail”).
37 For example, when UK ratified UN human rights treaties it decided whether to apply
   the treaties to Hong Kong, along with its other dependent territories. The UK also
   continued to report to UN treaty monitoring bodies on the implementation of human
   rights treaties in Hong Kong, until the handover on 1 July 1997.
38 G.A. Res. 2625 (XXV), Annex, Declaration on Principles of International Law
   Concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in Accordance with
   the Charter of the United Nations (Oct. 24, 1970).
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?                            207


to practice at least internal self-determination.

     Instead, the negotiations leading to the Joint Declaration were
conducted in secrecy, outside the supervision of the UN and with no
recognition of Hong Kong’s status as a “colonized people” with rights
under international law. Proposals to structure the negotiations as a
“three-legged stool” (so that the UK, China, and Hong Kong would each
                                        39
be represented) were rejected.               Beijing insisted that the Joint
Declaration would be a bilateral agreement and that Hong Kong could
not send representatives to the negotiations. After the Joint Declaration
was drafted (but not yet ratified), the British did invite the public to
comment on the treaty but the options were limited by that time: Hong
Kong could become a part of the PRC in 1997 under the terms of the
Joint Declaration or it could become a part of the PRC without any
agreement in place. Under this scenario, it is not surprising that the
                                                                             40
majority of respondents expressed support for the Joint Declaration.

     Indeed, as presented to the people, the Joint Declaration promised
that Hong Kong would be endowed with many of the powers that we
                                                           41
would normally associate with an independent state.             In this regard, the
treaty appeared to satisfy at least one of the factors associated with
successful autonomy: a clear division of powers. For example, the treaty
provides that Hong Kong will “be vested with executive, legislative and
independent judicial power” and continue to monitor its own border,


39 See, e.g., JOSEPH Y.S. CHENG ED., HONG KONG: IN SEARCH OF A FUTURE 7, 33, 231-32
   (1984); and JOHN M. CARROLL, A CONCISE HISTORY OF HONG KONG 180-82 (2007).
40 YASH GHAI, HONG KONG’S NEW CONSTITUTIONAL ORDER: THE RESUMPTION OF
   CHINESE SOVEREIGNTY AND THE BASIC LAW 55-56 (1997).
41 See, e.g., HANNUM, supra note 22, especially 129-50; and Hurst Hannum, The
   Foreign Affairs Powers of Autonomous Regions, 57 NORDIC J. INT’L L. 273, 273
   (1988).
208                                       《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



issue its own currency and travel documents, and operate its own
                     42
customs regime.            In contrast, Beijing promised to limit its own powers
of governance over Hong Kong to the areas of defense and foreign
           43
affairs.        Even in that arena, the Joint Declaration authorized Hong
Kong to enter “on its own” into agreements with foreign states and
                                    44
international organizations,             giving the territory a form of international
                      45
legal personality.

      The Joint Declaration is also full of language promising to protect
the “rights and freedoms” of Hong Kong residents, including the
freedoms of speech, assembly, association, travel, religious belief,
academic research, choice of occupation and the right to form trade
                               46
unions and to strike.               It further promised that the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) would
                                              47
remain in force in Hong Kong.                      This was particularly important
because neither treaty had been ratified by the PRC at the time (and the
PRC still has not ratified the ICCPR). When combined with the promise
to preserve Hong Kong’s common law legal system and its independent
                                                                            48
judiciary (endowed with the power of final adjudication)                         these
provisions reassured many Hong Kong residents, as well as the
international business community.



42 Joint Declaration, para. 3(6).
43 Id. at para. 3(1).
44 Id. at para. 3(10).
45 See generally RODA MUSHKAT, ONE COUNTRY, TWO INTERNATIONAL LEGAL
   PERSONALITIES: THE CASE OF HONG KONG (1997).
46 Joint Declaration, para. 5 and Annex I, Section XIII.
47 Id. at Annex I, Section XIII.
48 Id. at para. 3.
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?                               209


      What was missing? The first major weakness is that the Joint
Declaration was too vague regarding the plans for developing local
democracy. It is well recognized that autonomy cannot be practiced if
the inhabitants of the autonomous region are not able to elect the people
who are actually exercising the powers allocated to the autonomous
        49
region.      The Joint Declaration certainly implied that this would occur,
at least with respect to the local legislature. The treaty states that the
local government will be “composed of local inhabitants,” with a local
legislature “constituted by elections” and a Chief Executive who is
“selected by election or through consultations held locally” prior to
                                                           50
being appointed by the Central Government.                      These clauses were
apparently the most that Beijing was willing to agree to during the
negotiations and we now know that it had no intention of allowing Hong
Kong to develop local democracy. But during the public consultation on
the Joint Declaration, the British colonial government actively
encouraged Hong Kong residents to believe that a democratic system of
government would be in place prior to the handover. A “Green Paper”
was distributed in 1984, which proposed to transform Hong Kong into a
form of parliamentary democracy before 1997. Under that proposal, a
majority of the Legislative Council would be elected, a majority of the
Executive Council would be selected by the Legislative Council, and the
Governor would be selected by a joint meeting of the unofficial



49 See, e.g., Hurst Hannum & Richard B. Lillich, The Concept of Autonomy in
   International Law, 74 AM. J. INT’L L. 858, 865 (1980) (noting that the “great majority
   of autonomous entities surveyed have a locally elected legislative body as the
   fundamental source of local governmental power”); and Ghai, supra note 22, at 517
   (noting that democratic structures in the autonomous region “are necessary for the
   exercise and protection of autonomy”).
50 Joint Declaration, para. 3(4) and Annex I.
210                                  《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）


                                                             51
members of the Legislative and Executive Councils.

      Even after it was clear that the democracy reforms would be far
more modest than proposed in the 1984 Green Paper (due to the PRC’s
            52
opposition ), the British government continued to assure the UN
Human Rights Committee that it was pursuing measures to “establish a
                                                                    53
fully democratic system in Hong Kong” before 1997.                       In the end,
however, even the reforms that Governor Patten managed to push
through in 1995 were undone in 1997 by the Provisional Legislative
                                      54
Council established by Beijing.            The conflicts over democracy have
                                     55
plagued Hong Kong ever since.

      The second major weakness in OCTS is that Hong Kong’s
autonomy was not entrenched in a manner that could be enforced against
the Central Government. Article 31 of the PRC’s Constitution provides


51 HONG KONG GOVERNMENT, GREEN PAPER: THE FURTHER DEVELOPMENT OF
   REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT IN HONG KONG (July 1984), https://ia800200.us.
   archive.org/22/items/greenpaperfurthe00hong/greenpaperfurthe00hong.pdf. The term
   “unofficial members” is a term that was used to refer to members of the Legislative
   and Executive Councils who were not officials in the colonial government.
52 See Ming K. Chan, Democracy Derailed: Realpolitik in the Making of the Hong Kong
   Basic Law, 1985-90, in THE HONG KONG BASIC LAW: BLUEPRINT FOR “STABILITY AND
   PROSPERITY” UNDER CHINESE SOVEREIGNTY? 3, 3-35 (Ming K. Chan & David J.
   Clark eds., 1991).
53 UN HUMAN RIGHTS COMMITTEE, ADDENDUM TO THE FOURTH PERIODIC REPORTS OF
   STATES PARTIES DUE IN 1994, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN
   IRELAND, SUPPLEMENTARY REPORT ON THE DEPENDENT TERRITORIES, HONG KONG,
   CCPR/C/95/Add.5, para. 1 (Aug. 7, 1995), https://www.refworld.org/cgi-bin/texis/
   vtx/rwmain?page=search&docid=3ae6b0390&skip=0&query=CCPR/C/95/Add.5.
54 For analysis, see Albert H.Y. Chen, The Provisional Legislative Council of the SAR,
   27 HKLJ 1, 1-11 (1997); and Johannes M.M. Chan, The Jurisdiction and Legality of
   the Provisional Legislative Council, 27 HKLJ 374, 374-86 (1997).
55 See Alvin Y.H. Cheung, Road to Nowhere: Hong Kong’s Democratization and China’s
   Obligations under Public International Law, 40 BROOK. J. INT’L L. 465, 481-504
   (2015); and ALBERT H.Y. CHEN, THE CHANGING LEGAL ORDERS IN HONG KONG AND
   MAINLAND CHINA: ESSAYS ON “ONE COUNTRY, TWO SYSTEMS” 31-56 (2021).
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?                           211


for the creation of Special Autonomous Regions but it gives the National
                                                                                  56
People’s Congress free reign to determine the specific arrangements.
Moreover, the PRC’s Constitution has never been enforceable against
the Central Government because the PRC does not have an independent
judiciary or any concept of separation of powers. Thus, any
entrenchment of Hong Kong’s autonomy needed to be accomplished
through an international agreement that could be enforced in an
international forum.

     Unfortunately, the Joint Declaration is weak on this point, providing
simply that the policies stated in the treaty “will be stipulated” by the
National People’s Congress in a Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region (SAR) and that these policies will “remain
                                 57
unchanged for 50 years.”              Although the Basic Law became the
constitutional instrument for Hong Kong (and has been enforced by
Hong Kong courts against the local government), it cannot be enforced
against the Central Government. The Joint Declaration was also silent on
the process for consulting the Hong Kong public regarding the content
of the Basic Law (e.g., there was no clause requiring a referendum on
the Basic Law before enactment by the National People’s Congress) and
also on which entity would hold the power to interpret and enforce the
Basic Law (issues that are analyzed in Part III of this article).

     Moreover, the Joint Declaration never describes “autonomy” as a
right of the Hong Kong people and it does not even mention the concept


56 Art. 31 of The PRC’s Constitution provides: “The state may establish special
   administrative regions when necessary. The systems to be instituted in special
   administrative regions shall be prescribed by law enacted by the National People’s
   Congress in the light of specific conditions.”
57 Joint Declaration, para. 3(12).
212                                   《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



of internal self-determination. Legal scholars have analyzed a number of
doctrines that support Hong Kong’s claim to autonomy and internal self-
                 58
determination,        which is considered particularly appropriate when a
colonized people cannot exercise a right to external self-determination
                                           59
due to a competing territorial claim.           In such situations, an enforceable
right to autonomy could provide a form of “palliative” internal self-
                 60
determination.        But the Joint Declaration itself does not describe
autonomy in that rights-based language.

      Finally, the Joint Declaration did not provide for an independent
mechanism for dispute resolution or for any neutral processes of
negotiation and consultation in the event of disputes. There was a Sino-
British Joint Liaison Group, which met to ensure a “smooth transfer of
government” and to conduct consultations on certain disputes that arose
                                 61
during the transition period.         But apart from this transitory mechanism,
the Joint Declaration made no provision for dispute resolution. Ideally,
there should have been a clause allowing either party to take a dispute on
the interpretation and implementation of the Joint Declaration to the
International Court of Justice (perhaps with a requirement that mediation
                                      62
be attempted prior to litigation).

      While the lack of a dispute resolution clause does not make the
Joint Declaration any less binding on the PRC as a matter of

58 See, e.g., Mushkat, supra note 32; and Petersen, supra note 24.
59 MICHLA POMERANCE, SELF-DETERMINATION IN LAW AND PRACTICE: THE NEW
   DOCTRINE IN THE UNITED NATIONS 74 (1982).
60 TRINIDAD, supra note 35, at 243-44.
61 Joint Declaration, Annex II.
62 Although the UK has filed a declaration of recognizing the compulsory jurisdiction of
   the International Court of Justice (ICJ) the PRC has not done so. Thus, a specific
   dispute resolution clause, agreeing to the jurisdiction of the ICJ, would be necessary
   for a contentious case to enforce the Joint Declaration.
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?                               213


international law, it has made enforcement far more challenging. The
UK has monitored China’s compliance with the treaty, protested against
                                                                      63
significant breaches, and adopted some countermeasures.                    For example,
the UK has suspended its extradition treaty with Hong Kong, included
Hong Kong in the arms embargo that it has applied to Mainland China
since 1989 (to prevent it from importing firearms and other potential
weapons of repression), and developed a special immigration route for
Hong Kong residents who are eligible for British National (Overseas)
                                64
visas and their dependents.          But for the vast majority of Hong Kong’s 7
million residents (who have no desire to leave Hong Kong), there is very
little that the British government can do to enforce the Joint Declaration.
Sanctions targeting officials in Hong Kong and Mainland China are
                                                                 65
unlikely to change Beijing’s approach to Hong Kong.                   Indeed, some of
the sanctions may benefit Xi Jinping domestically, because they appear
to “pit China against hostile foreign forces” and generate nationalism,
thus deflecting attention from the PRC’s substantial economic
            66
problems.        Sanctions can also be used by those in power to justify an
                                                           67
even more authoritarian response in Hong Kong.


63 See, e.g., Six-monthly Reports on Hong Kong, GOV. UK (July 12, 2013), https://www.
   gov.uk/government/collections/six-monthly-reports-on-hong-kong.
64 Hong Kong and China: Foreign Secretary’s Statement in Parliament, GOV. UK (July
   20, 2020), https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/hong-kong-and-china-foreign-
   secretarys-statement-in-parliament. For information on the program for those eligible
   for British National (Overseas) visas, see British Nationals (Overseas) Visa, GOV. UK
   (July 22, 2020), https://www.gov.uk/british-national-overseas-bno-visa.
65 See Carole J. Petersen, Sanctions and Human Rights: Lessons from Hong Kong, 2(5)
   USALI PERSPECTIVES (Oct. 20, 2021), https://usali.org/usali-perspectives-blog/
   sanctions-and-human-rights-lessons-from-hong-kong.
66 Andrei Lungu, The Word Is Falling for China’s Hong Kong Trap, THE DIPLOMAT
   (July 18, 2020), https://thediplomat.com/2020/07/the-world-is-falling-for-chinas-hong-
   kong-trap/.
67 For example, Beijing has accused the United States of fomenting unrest in Hong
   Kong, citing sanctions as support for its claim. The Hong Kong government has
214                                   《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



      In short, the Joint Declaration provided an entirely inadequate
foundation for Hong Kong’s autonomy. Many of the most challenging
issues were left open and had to be resolved in the Basic Law, a national
law over which Beijing would have absolute control. If the PRC had
been a liberal democratic state with the rule of law then this might not
have been fatal because a good faith interpretation of the Joint
Declaration could have provided genuine autonomy and internal self-
determination. But given the authoritarian nature of the PRC, it was
exceedingly dangerous to give Beijing so much leeway in designing the
institutional framework. The implications of doing so are demonstrated
in the next section of the article.



III. The Basic Law: A Deceptive Institutional
     Framework

      The Hong Kong Basic Law was drafted by a Basic Law Drafting
Committee, enacted by the National People’s Congress in 1990, and
                                          68
brought into force on 1 July 1997.             The drafting of the Basic Law was
slightly more participatory than the drafting of the Joint Declaration. A
180-member Basic Law Consultative Committee was formed and 23 of
the 59 seats on the Basic Law Drafting Committee were occupied by



   adopted a similar narrative, insisting that US sanctions are part of a scheme to
   destabilize Hong Kong and “suppress” China. It uses this version of history to justify
   strict enforcement of the National Security Law and also Beijing’s decision to
   overhaul Hong Kong’s election system. See, e.g., HONG KONG GOVERNMENT, REPORT
   ON HONG KONG’S BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT: A PLACE WITH UNIQUE ADVANTAGES AND
   UNLIMITED OPPORTUNITIES (Sept. 27, 2021), https://www.hkeconomy.gov.hk/en/pdf/
   Business_report_2021.pdf.
68 For the history of the drafting process, see Chan, supra note 52.
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?                              215


local residents. These “representatives” were not, however, elected by
the general public. They were appointed by China from various sectors,
with heavy representation from Hong Kong’s business community
(many of whom were not particularly supportive of popular
               69
democracy).         Moreover, the majority of the seats on the Drafting
Committee were from Mainland China, ensuring that any controversial
issues — such as the pace of democratic reform and the power to
interpret the Basic Law — would be within Beijing’s ultimate control.

      Numerous provisions in the Basic Law were essentially copied
from the Joint Declaration, making it appear that Hong Kong would
exercise significant powers. For example, the local government was
empowered to issue its own travel documents (including a Hong Kong
identity card and a Hong Kong passport) and to apply its own
                          70
immigration controls.          It was also authorized to continue to issue its
own currency, to formulate its own monetary policy, and to maintain an
                                                                                     71
entirely separate taxation system, with no duty to pay national taxes.
The Basic Law also confirmed that Hong Kong could “conclude and
implement agreements with foreign states and regions and relevant
international organizations” in a variety of fields, including economic,
                                                                      72
trade, financial, monetary, shipping, and communications.                  Hong Kong
was expected to maintain its separate customs territory and was admitted


69 Frank Ching, Toward Colonial Sunset: The Wilson Regime, 1987-92, in PRECARIOUS
   BALANCE: HONG KONG BETWEEN CHINA AND BRITAIN, 1842-1992, at 173, 177 (Ming
   K. Chan ed., 1994) (noting that there was strong resistance from the conservative
   business community, as well as from China, to the concept of direct elections for all
   seats in the post-1997 Legislative Council).
70 Basic Law art. 154 (H.K.).
71 Basic Law art. 106 (H.K.).
72 Basic Law art. 151. For further information on Hong Kong’s powers regarding
   external affairs, see Basic Law arts. 150-157 (H.K.).
216                                    《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



to the World Trade Organization (WTO) as a founding member, using
                                      73
the name Hong Kong, China.                 Thus, in many spheres of law, Hong
Kong appeared to be endowed with a legal status that we would
normally associate with independent nations.

      In addition to these specific powers, Hong Kong was vested with
                       74
general executive           and legislative powers, defined in exceedingly
               75
broad terms.        The only express limitations are in the areas of defense
                       76
and foreign affairs         and in certain other areas where the Basic Law
expressly allocates a power to the Central Government (such as the
power to appoint the Chief Executive and the power to amend the Basic
       77
Law).       Thus, Hong Kong’s local legislature should be able to enact
laws in virtually every other field that is relevant to local governance,
with no need to demonstrate that the legislation falls within some
“enumerated power” of the territory. This broad legislative power
naturally raised the question of whether the Hong Kong SAR would hold
residual powers. The issue was discussed during the drafting process and
proved highly controversial. Hong Kong members of the Drafting
Committee believed that it would be natural to state that residual powers



73 See generally GOVERNMENT OF THE HONG KONG, World Trade Organization (WTO),
   http://www.tid.gov.hk/english/ito/wto/wto_overview.html (last visited Dec. 17, 2021).
74 Basic Law art. 16 states that Hong Kong “shall be vested with executive power” and
   “shall, on its own, conduct the administrative affairs of the Region in accordance with
   the relevant provisions of this law”. For more detailed provisions on the powers of the
   Chief Executive, see Basic Law arts. 43, 48-53. For provisions relating to the powers
   of the Executive Council (the closest thing to a cabinet in Hong Kong) and the Hong
   Kong government generally, see Basic Law arts. 54-65 (H.K.).
75 Basic Law art. 17 states that Hong Kong “shall be vested with legislative power”. For
   additional provisions relating to legislative powers and the legislative process, see
   Basic Law arts. 8, 17-18, 66-79 (H.K.).
76 Basic Law arts. 8, 17-18 (H.K.).
77 Basic Law arts. 45, 159 (H.K.).
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?                              217


rest with the local government, given the approach and structure of the
Basic Law. However, in 1988 (when the public consultation on the first
published draft of the Basic Law was about to commence), Wu Jianfan, a
Mainland member of the Drafting Committee, rejected the idea, arguing
                                                                                      78
that it would “confuse” China’s unitary system with federal systems.
Interestingly, however, Wu did not insist that residual powers must be
expressly granted to the Central Government. Rather, he argued that the
question of residual powers simply did not arise under the OCTS model
                                                                      79
and therefore need not be addressed in the Basic Law.                      (In practice
however, the power to interpret the Basic Law, which is discussed below,
would give Beijing not only “residual powers” but also the power to
amend virtually any clause in the Basic Law.)

      Article 8 provides that the sources of law in Hong Kong shall be:
                                                         80
the Basic Law; Hong Kong’s pre-existing laws                  (including ordinances,
common law and the rules of equity); and new ordinances enacted by the
local legislature. This means that national laws other than the Basic Law
are not supposed to be a general source of law for Hong Kong. If the
Central Government wishes to apply a national law in Hong Kong it is


78 See Jianfan Wu, Several Issues Concerning the Relationship between the Central
   Government of the People’s Republic of China and the Hong Kong Special
   Administrative Region, 2 J. CHINESE L. 65, 74 (1988).
79 Basic law art. 73 (H.K.).
80 Laws already in force in the British territory of Hong Kong on June 30, 1997 were
   adopted as part of the law of the Hong Kong SAR, provided that they had not been
   determined by the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress to be in
   conflict with the Basic Law. For a list of the ordinances and provisions of ordinances
   that were not adopted, see Decision of the Standing Committee of the National
   People’s Congress on the Treatment of the Laws Previously in Force in Hong Kong in
   Accordance with Article 160 of the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special
   Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China, adopted at the Twenty
   Fourth Session of the Standing Committee of the Eighth National People’s Congress
   on 23 February 1997.
218                                    《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



supposed to go through a special procedure set forth in article 18, which
involves seeking advice from the Committee for the Basic Law (a joint
committee with members from both Hong Kong and Mainland China)
                                                                                       81
and then adding the national law to Annex III of the Basic Law.
Except in emergency situations, article 18 purports to limit the types of
laws that will be applied to those relating to defence, foreign affairs, and
other matters “outside the autonomy” of Hong Kong.

      The Basic Law also repeats the provisions from the Joint
Declaration protecting civil liberties and includes numerous detailed
provisions promising to preserve Hong Kong’s independent judicial
                                                      82
system and rules of procedural fairness.                   The previous system of
appointment of judges (by an independent commission) was maintained,
as is their security of tenure. The Basic Law expressly allowed for the
                                                                           83
appointment of judges from other common law jurisdictions.                      Only the
Chief Justice of the Court of Final Appeal (CFA) and the Chief Judge of
the High Court were expressly required to be Chinese citizens (with no
right of abode in any foreign country). In the colonial period, the Privy
Council was the final court of appeal for Hong Kong and other British
colonies. In preparation for 1997, the CFA was established in Hong
Kong. There is no appeal beyond the CFA and no mechanism by which a
court in Mainland China (or any other central authority) can overturn its
judgment in a specific case. This was considered an important feature of
OCTS and one of the reasons that comparative scholars of autonomy


81 See Basic Law art. 18 (declaring that national laws “shall not be applied” in Hong
   Kong except for those contained in Annex III to the Basic Law and setting forth the
   procedure for adding a national law to Annex III).
82 Basic Law arts. 85, 89 (independence of the judiciary); art. 86 (jury trial for serious
   crimes); art. 87 (right to fair trial and other procedural protections).
83 Basic Law arts. 90-93 (H.K.).
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?                              219


originally viewed Hong Kong as exercising a particularly high degree of
autonomy.

     Thus, in many respects, the Basic Law appeared to provide a very
detailed institutional framework for Hong Kong’s exercise of autonomy.
In theory, it would have at least temporarily entrenched autonomy
because the PRC promised (in the Joint Declaration) not to change the
policies stated in the Basic Law for at least 50 years. Indeed, the people
of Hong Kong and the international community were encouraged to
                                                                               84
believe that OCTS might become a permanent arrangement.                             For
example, in 2002, when Hong Kong was admitted as a separate member
of the WTO, the Secretary for Constitutional Affairs delivered a speech
claiming that “One Country, Two Systems is here to stay” and that the
“Basic Law and common law system will always be there to serve Hong
        85
Kong.”

     In fact, the institutional framework for autonomy in the Basic Law
is actually very weak. This is because Beijing carefully inserted
provisions that enabled it to exercise enormous power over Hong Kong.
Most importantly, the power to interpret the Basic Law is vested in the
Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress. This is one of
the issues that was not addressed in the Sino-British Joint Declaration
and it was highly controversial during the drafting process for the Basic
Law, largely due to the conflicting approaches to legislative
interpretation followed in common law and socialist legal systems. Hong


84 Danny Gittings, What Will Happen to Hong Kong after 2047?, 42 CAL. W. INT’L L.J.
   37, 49-51 (2011) (summarizing public statements by Deng Xiaoping to this effect).
85 Speech by Secretary for Constitutional Affairs Stephen Lam, Seminar on Legal
   Landscape of China after Accession to WTO, GOVHK PRESS RELEASE (Sept. 7, 2002),
   www.info.gov.hk/gia/general/200209/07/0907233.htm.
220                                 《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



Kong members of the Drafting Committee argued that the power of
interpretation should rest with Hong Kong’s independent judiciary, as
                                                                      86
the Basic Law serves as Hong Kong’s constitutional instrument.             But
Beijing insisted that the power of interpretation should rest with the
NPC’s Standing Committee because the Basic Law is a national law (a
problem that can be traced back to the Joint Declaration itself).

      The final version of article 158 of the Basic Law reflects an
awkward compromise between these two positions. The Hong Kong
courts are authorized to interpret provisions of the Basic Law in the
course of adjudicating cases. But the Hong Kong CFA must seek an
interpretation from the NPC Standing Committee before issuing a final
judgment that turns on an interpretation of a provision of the Basic Law
concerning “affairs which are the responsibility of the Central People’s
Government” or “the relationship between the Central Authorities and
               87
the Region.”        In contrast, the NPC Standing Committee has a free-
standing power to interpret any clause of the Basic Law at any time;
there is no need for it to wait for a reference from Hong Kong’s CFA.
Once the Standing Committee issues an interpretation of the Basic Law
it is binding on the courts of Hong Kong in all future cases.

      The NPC Standing Committee’s power to interpret the Basic Law is
particularly problematic because the Standing Committee is not an
independent or neutral body (due to the centralized one-party system in
the PRC) and it does not follow common law judicial rules of
interpretation. This means that Beijing can use the NPC Standing



86 Martin Lee, A Tale of Two Articles, in THE BASIC LAW AND HONG KONG’S FUTURE
   309, 309-25 (Peter Wesley-Smith & Albert H.Y. Chen eds., 1988).
87 Basic Law art. 158 (H.K.).
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?                           221


Committee’s powers of interpretation to quickly amend or add to the
                                  88
Hong Kong Basic Law.                   In theory, the Standing Committee is
supposed to consult the Basic Law Committee (which has
representatives from Hong Kong) before exercising its powers under
article 158 (as well as under articles 17 or 18). Indeed, at one point it
was hoped that the Basic Law Committee would hold hearings and
evolve into a sort of constitutional court, which would provide reasoned
advice to the NPC Standing Committee before it exercised its power of
interpretation. But the process of consultation has been shrouded in
secrecy and it does not appear to have restrained the NPC Standing
                                           89
Committee in any meaningful way.                Indeed, it has been reported that
the Hong Kong members of the Basic Law Committee have sometimes
been summoned to Beijing at short notice, presented with a draft, and
                                                      90
asked only to provide minor comments.                      Thus, the process of
consulting the Basic Law Committee has apparently become a mere
                                                                               91
formality — a “window-dressing process with no real significance.”

     A particularly disturbing incident was the NPC Standing
Committee’s interpretation of article 104 of the Basic Law, issued in
2016. Unlike previous interpretations, the 2016 interpretation was
clearly intended to influence the outcome of a pending case. The judge
in the Hong Kong Court of First Instance had already heard the case (on
3 November 2016) and was preparing to deliver a reserved judgement on


88 Johannes M.M. Chan, Reconciliation of the NPCSC’s Power of Interpretation of the
   Basic Law with the Common Law in the HKSAR, 50 HKLJ 657, 657-84 (2020).
89 Eric C. Ip, Prototype Constitutional Supervision in China: The Lessons of the Hong
   Kong Basic Law Committee, 10 ASIAN J. COMP. L. 323, 323-42 (2016).
90 C.L. Lim & Johannes M.M. Chan, Autonomy and Central-Local Relations, in LAW OF
   THE HONG KONG CONSTITUTION 37, 68-69 (Johannes M.M. Chan & C.L. Lim eds.,
   2011).
91 Chan, supra note 88, at 659.
222                                    《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



the validity of the oath of office taken by two recently elected
               92
legislators.        Before he could do so, the NPC Standing Committee
hurriedly adopted an interpretation of article 104, covering precisely the
issues that were pending before the court and making it crystal clear that
                                                                          93
Beijing wanted the two elected legislators to be disqualified.                 This was
a blatant interference in what is supposed to be Hong Kong’s
                                  94
independent judicial branch.

      Although Professor Albert H.Y. Chen acknowledges that the 2016
interpretation by the NPC Standing Committee is worrying, he has
continued to argue that Beijing has demonstrated “self-restraint” with
regard to the power of interpretation because it has only issued five
                                  95
“interpretations” since 1997.          In fact, the NPC Standing Committee has
used its power to interpret the Basic Law far more often, albeit often
under a different label, such as “decision.” The Hong Kong
Government’s website for the Basic Law categorizes NPC Standing
Committee decisions relating to Hong Kong under “Other Instruments”



92 The Chief Executive of the HKSAR and another v. Yau Wai Ching and others, [2016]
   6 H.K.C. 417 (C.F.I.). The court’s hearing was held on Nov. 3; the NPC Standing
   Committee issued its Interpretation on Nov. 7; and the judgement was issued on Nov.
   15.
93 Interpretation of Article 104 of the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative
   Region of the People’s Republic of China by the Standing Committee of the National
   People’s Congress, adopted by the Standing Committee of the Twelfth National
   People’s Congress at its Twenty-fourth Session on 7 November 2016, unofficial
   English translation available at https://www.basiclaw.gov.hk/filemanager/content/en/
   files/basiclawtext/basiclawtext_doc27.pdf (last visited Jan. 10, 2022).
94 For commentary on the unsuccessful request for leave to appeal, see Surabhi Chopra,
   Yau Wai Ching v Chief Executive of HKSAR: A Landmark Blow to Liberal
   Constitutionalism, IACL-AIDC BLOG (Dec. 15, 2020), https://blog-iacl-aidc.org/
   constitutional-landmark-judgments-in-asia/2020/12/15/yau-wai-ching-v-chief-
   executive-of-hksar-a-landmark-blow-to-liberal-constitutionalism.
95 CHEN, supra note 55, at 71-73.
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?                        223


                                                                  96
and treats them as equivalent to the text of the Basic Law.            In 2020-21
alone, Beijing used this mechanism to: postpone the Legislative Council
elections that were originally scheduled for September 2020 (knowing
that pro-government candidates were likely to perform badly, as they did
in the November 2019 District Council elections); to disqualify pro-
democracy candidates and legislators; and, most recently, to completely
                                         97
overhaul the local electoral system.

     In essence, Beijing has used the power of interpretation as a quick
way to amend the Basic Law, without having to bother with the
amendment process specified in article 159. The Central Government
may think that this is an efficient way to settle controversies in Hong
Kong. But in its rush to do so, it has often undermined efforts by
moderates in Hong Kong to negotiate workable compromises. A good
example is the 2014 debate on article 45, which provided for “gradual
and orderly progress” toward the “ultimate aim” of selecting the Chief
Executive “by universal suffrage upon nomination by a broadly
representative nominating committee.” Because Beijing had promised
that this could begin in 2017, there was an active debate in Hong Kong
in 2013-2014 on how to constitute the nominating committee. Benny Tai
and his supporters were convinced that anything less than civic
nomination would be “fake democracy” and they were determined to
make it impossible for a nominating committee to screen out candidates.
However, there were also many moderates in Hong Kong (including
Professor Albert H.Y. Chen and Ronny Tong) who were endorsing



96 The Hong Kong Government lists these “Other Instruments” together with the
   Annexes to the Basic Law. See BASIC LAW, ANNEX & INSTRUMENT, https://www.
   basiclaw.gov.hk/en/basiclaw/annex-instrument.html (last visited Dec. 18, 2021).
97 Id. at Instruments 28-31.
224                                  《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



proposals that would preserve the nominating committee’s role while
making it reasonably representative of the general public and lowering
the threshold of votes necessary for nomination. Had one of these
proposals secured sufficient support, it might have provided a way for
                                                                          98
Hong Kong to elect a Chief Executive with a popular mandate.

      Instead of permitting Hong Kong to work through these proposals,
the NPC Standing Committee brought the debate to an abrupt halt with
                                         99
its Decision of 31 August 2014.               Under its terms, the nominating
committee would be no more representative than the “selection
committee” that had selected the fourth Chief Executive and it would
nominate only two or three candidates, all of whom would require the
endorsement of more than half of the members. This would have made it
impossible for a member of one of the pan-democratic parties to be
nominated, although they had consistently won a majority of the popular
vote for the legislative seats from geographic constituencies. This
diminished the credibility of moderates in Hong Kong and effectively
launched the Occupy Central and Umbrella movements in September
2014. When these movements failed to generate any concessions from
Beijing, Hong Kong became further polarized between the pro-


98 These proposals were discussed at numerous forums in Hong Kong, including the
   Academic Roundtable: “Universal Suffrage and Nomination Procedures: Imperatives
   from Article 25 ICCPR”, organized by the Centre for Comparative and Public Law, at
   the Faculty of Law of the University of Hong Kong on Mar. 20, 2014.
99 Decision of the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress on Issues
   Relating to the Selection of the Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Special
   Administrative Region by Universal Suffrage and on the Method of Forming the
   Legislative Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region in the Year 2016,
   adopted at the Tenth Session of the Standing Committee of the Twelfth National
   People’s Congress on 31 August 2014, English translation available at
   https://www.basiclaw.gov.hk/filemanager/content/en/files/basiclawtext/basiclawtext_d
   oc25.pdf (last visited Dec. 18, 2021).
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?                               225


democracy and pro-Beijing camps. One year later, the Hong Kong
Government’s proposal to elect future Chief Executives by means of
“universal suffrage” failed to pass because the pro-democracy legislators
objected to the restrictions on the nomination process mandated by the
                                                                     100
NPC Standing Committee’s Decision of 31 August 2014.                       Without the
legitimacy of a local election victory, the Hong Kong government has
become almost entirely dependent on Beijing for political support and
increasingly disconnected from the general public.

      The effects of this situation became painfully clear in 2019 when
Carrie Lam proposed to amend Hong Kong’s law governing extradition
so as to allow for case-by-case extradition to Mainland China (as well as
other jurisdictions that had no formal extradition agreement with Hong
        101
Kong).        An elected Chief Executive would have known better than to
make such a proposal, as it was not constitutionally required and was
guaranteed to generate huge public opposition. An elected Chief
Executive also would have known that she needed to withdraw the bill
after the peaceful protests of June 2019, the largest in Hong Kong’s
history. Instead, Carrie Lam stubbornly defended her proposal, declined
to negotiate, and relied on the exhausted local police to maintain order. It
was only after violence had erupted that she finally agreed to withdraw
the bill, by which time Hong Kong had entered a heartbreaking cycle of
escalating conflicts between the police and protesters.




100 Simon N.M. Young, Rethinking the Process of Political Reform in Hong Kong, 45
    HKLJ 381, 381-88 (2015).
101 For critique of the local government’s stated reasons for introducing the extradition
    bill (which apparently was not suggested by Beijing), see P.Y. Lo, The Unprosecuted
    Taiwan Homicide, the Unaccepted Extradition Law Amendment Bill and the
    Underestimated Common Law, 50 HKLJ 373, 374 (2020).
226                                 《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



       The next section of the article analyzes the difficult area of national
security legislation, which was originally considered to be within Hong
Kong’s realm of autonomy.



IV. Defense, National Security, and Article 23 of the
    Basic Law

       Article 23 of the Basic Law appeared to endow Hong Kong with
even more autonomy than promised in the Joint Declaration. The treaty
states that “defense and foreign affairs” would be the responsibility of
the Central Government and this is the norm in autonomy
                 102
arrangements.          However, when it came time to draft the Basic Law,
the issue became very controversial. This was largely because the
Central Government has historically defined national security offences
rather broadly, to include “counter-revolutionary” acts that might
                                                                               103
threaten the Chinese Communist Party’s monopoly on political power.
Article 23 thus went through several drafts. In its final form, it provides:

      The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region shall enact
      laws on its own to prohibit any act of treason, secession,
      sedition, subversion against the Central People’s Government,
      or theft of state secrets, to prohibit foreign political
      organizations or bodies from conducting political activities in
      the Region, and to prohibit political organizations or bodies of


102 Hannum & Lillich, supra note 49, at 872.
103 Albert H.Y. Chen, Hong Kong in China: The Project of “One Country, Two
      Systems” and the Question of National Security, in CHINA’S NATIONAL SECURITY:
      ENDANGERING HONG KONG’S RULE OF LAW? 19, 35-36 (Cora Chan & Fiona de
      Londras eds., 2020).
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?                            227


     the Region from establishing ties with foreign political
     organizations or bodies.

     The references to “subversion” and “foreign political organizations”
were inserted in the aftermath of the June 4, 1989 crackdown in
Tiananmen Square. This was a time of great tension and the drafting
process ceased for a period of time. When the meetings resumed, the
Mainland Chinese representatives on the Drafting Committee insisted on
                                                104
strengthening the language of article 23.             Nonetheless, because it still
empowered Hong Kong to enact this legislation “on its own” (rather
than be obligated to enforce the PRC’s national legislation), article 23
was still arguably a strong indicator of Hong Kong’s autonomy.

     Unfortunately, the local government’s one and only attempt to fully
implement article 23 was unsuccessful. A National Security (Legislative
Provisions) Bill was introduced in 2003 and was largely consistent with
the ICCPR. But the Hong Kong government insisted on an accelerated
timetable for public consultation and legislative scrutiny; it also flatly
                                                                           105
rejected a number of amendments proposed by legislators.                         This
attitude (an early demonstration of the lack of political skills of Hong
Kong’s appointed government) made the public very anxious and
created a perception that the terms of the legislation had been pre-
negotiated with the Central Government. Eventually, on 1 July 2003,
these concerns were expressed in a protest march of more than 500,000
people. Although the Chief Executive at the time, Tung Chee-Hwa,


104 See Carole J. Petersen, Hong Kong’s Spring of Discontent: The Rise and Fall of the
    National Security Bill in 2003, in NATIONAL SECURITY AND FUNDAMENTAL
    FREEDOMS: HONG KONG’S ARTICLE 23 UNDER SCRUTINY 13, 13-62 (Hualing Fu,
    Carole J. Petersen & Simon N.M. Young eds., 2005).
105 Id. at 20-48.
228                                  《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



subsequently offered some key amendments, it was too late to regain
                  106
public support.         The local government eventually withdrew the bill
and never attempted to re-introduce it.

      Despite this failure, Hong Kong has always had a significant body
of local law that falls within the scope of article 23, including ordinances
                                           107
restricting the operation of societies           and prohibiting acts of treason,
                        108
sedition, terrorism.          Thus it really only lacked local legislation
prohibiting the offenses of “secession” or “subversion” against the
Central Government (which might well have been covered, in large part,
by the offenses of treason and sedition). Nonetheless, the failure to fully
implement article 23, together with the sustained unrest of 2019,
provided the Central Government with an excuse to act on its own.
When it did so, it took the opportunity to fundamentally change Hong
Kong’s criminal justice system for political offenses.

      On 28 May 2020, the National People’s Congress adopted a
Decision authorizing the NPC Standing Committee to draft a law to
                                                 109
protect national security in Hong Kong.                Less than one month later,


106 Id. at 50-53.
107 Indeed, the Societies Ordinance was amended in 1997 to incorporate some of the
    precise language of article 23 and the Hong Kong government has enforced it; see
    Carole J. Petersen, Prohibiting the Hong Kong National Party: Has Hong Kong
    Violated the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights?, 48 HKLJ 789-
    805 (2018).
108 Carole J. Petersen, Balancing National Security and the Rule of Law: Article 23 of
    the Hong Kong Basic Law, HONG KONG WATCH (Nov. 1, 2018), https://www.
    hongkongwatch.org/all-posts/2018/11/1/new-report-balancing-national-security-and-
    the-rule-of-law-article-23-of-the-basic-law.
109 Decision of the National People’s Congress on Establishing and Improving the Legal
    System and Enforcement Mechanisms for the Hong Kong Special Administrative
    Region to Safeguard National Security, adopted at the Third Session of the
    Thirteenth National People’s Congress on 28 May 2020, https://www.elegislation.
    gov.hk/hk/A215 (last visited Sept. 20, 2021).
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?                           229


on 30 June 2020, the Standing Committee adopted the NSL. It was
added to Annex III of the Hong Kong Basic Law that same day and
                                              110
brought into force before midnight.                 The police began arresting
people for suspected violations the very next day.

     It is important to appreciate that the NSL does far more than create
new criminal offenses. It has established powerful new security
institutions, which are now operating openly in Hong Kong and directly
accountable to Beijing. Previously, the investigation of possible crimes
                                                                          111
in Hong Kong was entirely the responsibility of the local police.               This
division of power has now been fundamentally changed. Beijing has
established an Office for Safeguarding National Security of the Central
                                            112
People’s Government in Hong Kong,                 which is staffed and funded by
Beijing. Although its personnel are supposed to abide by Hong Kong
laws, there is no mechanism to hold them accountable because they have
been expressly exempted from Hong Kong’s jurisdiction for acts in the
                 113
course of duty.        Their vehicles are also not subject to search by local
                     114
law enforcement.

     There is also a new “special branch” in the Hong Kong Police
Force to investigate NSL offences, which can recruit “qualified
                                                                                 115
professionals and technical personnel” directly from the Mainland.
This special branch has been endowed with significant new powers of
               116                                                               117
investigation,       including the power to conduct warrantless searches.


110 Hong Kong Government Gazette, L.N. 136 of 2020.
111 Joint Declaration, para. 3(3) and Annex I (XII); Basic Law art. 14 (H.K.).
112 NSL arts. 48-55 (H.K.).
113 Id. at art. 50.
114 Id. at art. 60.
115 Id. at art. 43.
116 For an introduction to these new powers, see the presentation by Professor Simon
230                                   《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



A newly created Committee for Safeguarding National Security has
promulgated rules for these searches, as well as “operating guidelines
                                                 118
and principles” for covert surveillance.               These rules would be very
difficult to challenge because the NSL appears to exempt acts of the
                                                                                    119
Committee for Safeguarding National Security from judicial review.
The NSL also provides for a special prosecution division for NSL
offences. The prosecutors are appointed by the Secretary for Justice but
only after she has obtained consent from the Committee for
Safeguarding National Security, which is directly supervised by the
                         120
Central Government.

      The only positive aspect of the NSL is that articles 4 and 5 of the
NSL purport to provide for the continued enforcement of the rights that
Hong Kong residents have enjoyed, including those protected in the
Basic Law and in the ICCPR. The Hong Kong’s CFA appeared to affirm
the significance of these provisions in its first decision under the NSL. In
HKSAR v. Lai Chee Ying, the government appealed a lower court
decision that granted bail to Jimmy Lai, the former publisher of the



    N.M. Young at the University of Hong Kong’s seminar, Balancing Freedom and
    Security: the Hong Kong National Security Law, HKU LAW (July 4, 2020),
    https://video.law.hku.hk/balancing-freedom-and-security-the-hong-kong-national-
    security-law/.
117 NSL art. 43 (H.K.).
118 English translations are available on the Hong Kong Government’s “SAFEGUARDING
    NATIONAL SECURITY IN HONG KONG” website, https://www.isd.gov.hk/national
    security/eng/law.html (last visited Dec. 16, 2021).
119 NSL art. 14. It should be noted, however, that Professor Albert H.Y. Chen has argued
    that the Committee’s decisions may be judicially reviewable. See Chris Lau,
    National Security Law: Decisions of New Committee in Hong Kong Not Above
    Judicial Review, Legal Expert Says, SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST (July 11, 2020),
    https://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/politics/article/3092792/national-security-
    law-decisions-new-committee-hong-kong-not.
120 NSL art. 18 (H.K.).
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?                               231


Apple Daily (which has been closed down as the result of the NSL).
Although the CFA held that article 42(2) is a specific exception to Hong
Kong’s ordinary bail regime, it also stated that articles 4 and 5 are
“centrally important to the interpretation of the NSL” and that “those
rights, freedoms and values are to be protected and adhered to” in
                       121
applying the NSL.            Thus, although the CFA made it clear that the
                                                                                 122
courts must enforce clearly worded provisions in the NSL,                              it
appeared to also remind prosecutors and the trial courts to make an effort
to interpret any vague clauses so as to comply with the ICCPR, which is
preserved in article 4 of the NSL. Article 19 of the ICCPR does permit
restrictions on freedom of expression to protect national security but
                                                                          123
only to the extent that they are necessary and proportionate.                   The UN
Human Rights Committee has repeatedly reminded governments that
they cannot simply invoke “national security” as a blanket justification
                                             124
for suppressing political expression.              Rather, a restriction adopted in
the name of national security must be a proportionate response to a
tangible threat. Hong Kong’s CFA has developed a similar
                                                                 125
proportionality test in its own pre-NSL jurisprudence.



121 HKSAR v. Lai Chee Ying, (2021) 24 H.K.C.F.A.R. 33 (C.F.A.).
122 NSL art. 62 states that this “law shall prevail where provisions of the local laws of
    the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region are inconsistent with this law”.
123 ICCPR art 19(3). See also Human Rights Committee CCPR/C/GC/34, General
    Comment No. 34, Article 19: Freedoms of opinion and expression (Sept. 12, 2011),
    https://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrc/docs/gc34.pdf.
124 UN Human Rights Committee, Tae Hoon Park v. Republic of Korea,
    CCPR/C/64/D/628/1995 (Nov. 3, 1998), https://www.refworld.org/cases,HRC,
    3f588effe.html, para. 10.3. For additional examples, see Carole J. Petersen, Article
    23 of the Hong Kong Basic Law: International Law and Institutions as Sources of
    Resilience, in CHINA’S NATIONAL SECURITY: ENDANGERING HONG KONG’S RULE OF
    LAW? 231, 231-49 (Cora Chan & Fiona de Londras eds., 2020).
125 See, e.g., HKSAR v. Ng Kung Siu, (1999) 2 H.K.C.F.A.R. 442 (C.F.A.); and
    HKSAR v. Fong Kwok Shan Christine, (2017) 20 H.K.C.F.A.R. 425 (C.F.A.).
232                                 《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



        If the Hong Kong government were serious about complying with
the ICCPR, then we would expect to see police and prosecutors applying
that      proportionality   test when       they    enforce    NSL provisions.
Unfortunately, the local government appears to be doing the opposite,
interpreting vaguely defined offenses as broadly as possible so as to
stifle critical speech and political activities. A particularly striking
example was the decision to charge 47 pro-democracy politicians with
“subversion” for organizing and/or participating in a political primary in
                                                       126
July 2020, soon after the NSL went into force.               The government has
also used the “incitement to secession” offense to charge a significant
                                                              127
number of people for entirely peaceful speech acts.                 Many of these
defendants are languishing in jail because of the NSL’s presumption
against bail. The UN Human Rights Committee will certainly condemn
these prosecutions in its upcoming review of Hong Kong’s compliance
with the ICCPR.

        The first conviction under the NSL — that of Tong Ying Kit — is
also worrying, partly because it lacks any analysis of the ICCPR but also
because the judges appear to have interpreted the relevant offenses in the
                                   128
NSL as broadly as possible.              Tong initially appealed both of his


126 WONG & KELLOGG, supra note 12, Appendix C (listing arrestees and alleged
       offenses).
127 Id. See also Selina Cheng, Hong Kong Police Confirm 8 Arrested for Unlawful
    Assembly and “Inciting Secession” during Peaceful CUHK Campus Demo, HONG
    KONG FREE PRESS (Dec. 7, 2020), https://hongkongfp.com/2020/12/07/hong-kong-
    police-confirm-8-arrested-for-unlawful-assembly-and-inciting-secession-during-
    peaceful-cuhk-campus-demo/.
128 For critique of the conviction and the failure to use the ICCPR as a guide to
    interpreting vague language in the NSL, see Carole J. Petersen, Hong Kong’s First
    Conviction for Incitement to Secession: What Role for the ICCPR?, 25(22) AM.
    SOC’Y INT’L L. (Oct. 13, 2021), https://www.asil.org/insights/volume/25/issue/22.
    See also THOMAS E. KELLOGG & ERIC YAN-HO LAI, THE TONG YING-KIT NSL
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?                           233


convictions, which would have given appellate judges an opportunity to
interpret the vague language in the NSL in a way that complies with the
         129
ICCPR.         However, in January 2022, it was reported that Tong Ying
Kit (who has been in prison since his arrest) decided to drop his appeal,
apparently without consulting or even informing his lawyers. After being
notified of this development by a letter from the court, the Senior
Council who had been representing Tong Ying Kit told the press that he
                                                                        130
had “no idea” why his young client would abandon his appeal.

     Moreover, the CFA’s most recent judgment, HKSAR v. Ng Hau Yi
Sidney, does not inspire much confidence. In that case, the CFA held that
the new presumption against bail (contained in article 42 of the NSL)
applies even to non-NSL offenses, so long as they concern national
         131
security.      The impact in this particular case is that defendants charged
with distributing “seditious materials” (which the Hong Kong
prosecutors are interpreting so broadly as to include children’s picture
books) will sit in jail while awaiting trial (although the CFA did remind
trial court judges to proceed with these cases as expeditiously as
possible). But the case is worrying for two other reasons. First, given
that the language in article 42 is ambiguous, one would have expected
the CFA to look to article 9 of the ICCPR for guidance and not give



    VERDICT: AN INTERNATIONAL AND COMPARATIVE LAW ANALYSIS, GEORGETOWN
    CENTER FOR ASIAN LAW (Oct. 20, 2021), https://www.law.georgetown.edu/law-
    asia/wp-content/uploads/sites/31/2021/10/TongYingKitVerdictGCAL.pdf.
129 Id.
130 Kelly Ho, First Hong Kong Activist Jailed under National Security Law Drops
    Appeal in “Surprise” Move, HONG KONG FREE PRESS (Jan. 13, 2022),
    https://hongkongfp.com/2022/01/13/first-hong-kong-activist-jailed-under-national-
    security-law-drops-appeal-in-surprise-move/.
131 HKSAR v. Ng Hau Yi Sidney, FAMC 32/2021 (C.F.A. Dec. 14, 2021) (Legal
    Reference System) (H.K.).
234                                《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



article 42 a broader interpretation than necessary. Second, the CFA went
further and also held that the extraordinary investigation powers
conferred by article 43 could also apply to non-NSL offenses so long as
they concern national security. There was no need to address this issue in
                                          132
an appeal relating to a bail application.

      Finally, it should be noted that the NSL provides a mechanism for
removing a defendant from Hong Kong’s jurisdiction, which was not
foreseeable from the model of autonomy presented to the Hong Kong
people in 1984. Under article 55 of the NSL, the central authorities can
now exercise jurisdiction if (1) the case is “complex” due to the
involvement of a foreign country or external elements; (2) a serious
situation occurs where the Hong Kong Government is unable to
effectively enforce the law; or (3) a major and imminent threat to
national security has occurred. The procedures for shifting jurisdiction
are quite simple: the Central Government only needs to approve a
“request” from Hong Kong’s Chief Executive, which will certainly be
made if Beijing suggests it. There appears to be no procedure by which
an individual could ask a Hong Kong court to review the Chief
Executive’s decision to request that the case be transferred to the
Mainland. If the Central Government asserts jurisdiction, then China’s
Criminal Procedure Law and all other relevant national laws will apply,
including those relating to investigations, interrogation, prosecution, trial
               133
and penalties.       In essence, article 55 provides for the possibility of
extradition to Mainland China without even the formality of an


132 See Thomas E. Kellogg, How a Ruling by Hong Kong’s Top Court Opens the Door
    to a More Intrusive Security Law, HONG KONG FREE PRESS (Dec. 17, 2021),
    https://hongkongfp.com/2021/12/17/how-a-ruling-by-hong-kongs-top-court-opens-
    the-door-to-a-more-intrusive-security-law/.
133 NSL art. 57 (H.K.).
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?                 235


extradition hearing — a cruel irony given that the enormous anti-
government protests of 2019 were inspired by the Hong Kong public’s
strong desire to prevent extradition to the Mainland.



V. Conclusion

     Although some commentators now describe Hong Kong as “just
another city in China,” that is overstating the situation. For now, Hong
Kong residents continue to enjoy a higher degree of religious freedom,
press freedom, and access to the internet than exists on the Mainland.
Hong Kong’s legal profession and judiciary are also still more
independent than in the Mainland, although under severe political
pressure. But these trappings of Hong Kong’s separate common law
legal system are not entrenched — they will continue only if Beijing
decides that they are useful to it.

     It would be a mistake, however, to attribute the failure of OCTS
entirely to the PRC’s authoritarian system. The fault also lies in the UN’s
failure to stay involved and in the flawed model of autonomy that was
ultimately set forth in the Joint Declaration. Because the conflict was
treated as a bilateral territorial dispute, the UK and the PRC were
permitted to draft a treaty with elaborate promises but no detailed plan
for local democracy and no mechanism for independent dispute
resolution. This enabled Beijing to control both the drafting and the
interpretation of the Hong Kong Basic Law. Thus, rather than
entrenching autonomy, the Joint Declaration and the Basic Law
ultimately became vehicles through which Beijing can dominate all three
branches of Hong Kong’s government and change, at will, the entire
236                                   《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



institutional framework for local governance.

       Far from serving as a showcase for territorial autonomy, Hong
Kong may well be remembered as a classic example of a “bait and
switch.” The Joint Declaration appeared to promise Hong Kong far more
autonomy than the typical autonomous region enjoys. But that high
degree of formal autonomy only increased the Central Government’s
opposition to local democracy and thus undermined autonomy in
           134
practice.        With the benefit of hindsight, no neutral observer could
suggest that OCTS be adopted elsewhere.




134 Professor Albert H.Y. Chen has described this as the “paradox” of Hong Kong’s
      autonomy. See CHEN, supra note 55, at 74.
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?           237




                                  References

Applebaum, Anne. 2020. Twilight of Democracy: The Seductive Lure of
     Authoritarianism. New York, NY: Doubleday.
Cardinal, Paulo. 2013. Macau: Transformation of an Historic Autonomy.
     Pp. 383-411 in Practising Self-Government: A Comparative Study
     of Autonomous Regions, edited by Yash Ghai and Sophia Woodman.
     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
─. 2020. Rule of Law Resilience: Comparative Perspectives from
     Macau. Pp. 87-100 in China’s National Security: Endangering
     Hong Kong’s Rule of Law?, edited by Cora Chan and Fiona de
     Londras. London: Hart Publishing.
Carroll, John M. 2007. A Concise History of Hong Kong. Prince
     George’s County, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
Cassese, Antonio. 1995. Self-Determination of Peoples: A Legal
     Reappraisal. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Chan, Cora. 2019. Demise of “One Country, Two Systems”? Reflections
     on the Hong Kong Rendition Saga. Hong Kong Law Journal
     49:447-457.
Chan, Johannes M.M. 1997. The Jurisdiction and Legality of the
     Provisional Legislative Council. Hong Kong Law Journal 27:374-
     386.
─. 2011. Asymmetry in the Face of Heavily Disproportionate
     Power Relations: Hong Kong. Pp. 121-147 in Asymmetric
     Autonomy and the Settlement of Ethnic Conflicts, edited by Marc
     Weller and Katherine Nobbs. Philadelphia, PA: University of
     Pennsylvania Press.
─. 2020. Reconciliation of the NPCSC’s Power of Interpretation of
238                             《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



      the Basic Law with the Common Law in the HKSAR. Hong Kong
      Law Journal 50:657-684.
Chan, Ming K. 1991. Democracy Derailed: Realpolitik in the Making of
      the Hong Kong Basic Law, 1985-90. Pp. 3-35 in The Hong Kong
      Basic Law: Blueprint for “Stability and Prosperity” under Chinese
      Sovereignty?, edited by Ming K. Chan and David J. Clark. Hong
      Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
Chen, Albert H.Y. 1997. The Provisional Legislative Council of the SAR.
      Hong Kong Law Journal 27:1-11.
─. 2019. A Perfect Storm: Hong Kong-Mainland Rendition of
      Fugitive Offenders. Hong Kong Law Journal 49:419-430.
─. 2020. Hong Kong in China: The Project of “One Country, Two
      Systems” and the Question of National Security. Pp. 19-40 in
      China’s National Security: Endangering Hong Kong’s Rule of Law?,
      edited by Cora Chan and Fiona de Londras. London: Hart
      Publishing.
─. 2021. The Changing Legal Orders in Hong Kong and Mainland
      China: Essays on “One Country, Two Systems”. Hong Kong: City
      University Press.
Cheng, Joseph Y.S., ed. 1984. Hong Kong: In Search of a Future. Hong
      Kong: Oxford University Press.
Cheung, Alvin Y. H. 2015. Road to Nowhere: Hong Kong’s
      Democratization     and   China’s   Obligations   under   Public
      International Law. Brooklyn Journal of International Law 40:465-
      546.
Ching, Frank. 1994. Toward Colonial Sunset: The Wilson Regime, 1987-
      92. Pp. 173-198 in Precarious Balance: Hong Kong between China
      and Britain, 1842-1992, edited by Ming K. Chan. London:
      Routledge.
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?              239


Ghai, Yash. 1997. Hong Kong’s New Constitutional Order: The
     Resumption of Chinese Sovereignty and the Basic Law. Hong Kong:
     Hong Kong University Press.
─. 2000. Autonomy as a Strategy for Diffusing Conflict. Pp. 483-
     530 in International Conflict Resolution after the Cold War, edited
     by Paul C. Stern and Daniel Duckman. Washington, D.C.: National
     Academies Press.
─ . 2013. Hong Kong’s Autonomy: Dialects of Powers and
     Institutions. Pp. 315-348 in Practising Self-Government: A
     Comparative Study of Autonomous Regions, edited by Yash Ghai
     and Sophia Woodman. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ginsburg, Tom, Aziz Z. Huq, and Mila Versteeg. 2018. The Coming
     Demise of Liberal Constitutionalism?. University of Chicago Law
     Review 85:239-255.
Gittings, Danny. 2011. What Will Happen to Hong Kong after 2047?.
     California Western International Law Journal 42:37-60.
Hannum, Hurst. 1988. The Foreign Affairs Powers of Autonomous
     Regions. Nordic Journal of International Law 57:273-288.
─. 1996. Autonomy, Sovereignty, and Self-Determination: The
     Accommodation of Conflicting Rights. Revised ed. Philadelphia, PA:
     University of Pennsylvania Press.
Hannum, Hurst, and Richard B. Lillich. 1980. The Concept of
     Autonomy in International Law. American Journal of International
     Law 74:858-889.
Hansell, Herbert J., Robert E. Lutz, James V. Feinerman, David H.
     Popper, and Hurst Hannum. 1986. The Hong Kong Accord as a
     Model for Dealing with Other Disputed Territories. Proceedings of
     the Annual Meeting (American Society of International Law)
     80:348-368.
240                            《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



Ip, Eric C. 2016. Prototype Constitutional Supervision in China: The
      Lessons of the Hong Kong Basic Law Committee. Asian Journal of
      Comparative Law 10:323-342.
Jayawickrama, Nihal. 1989. Public Law. Pp. 49-108 in The Law in Hong
      Kong, 1969-1989, edited by Raymond Wacks. Hong Kong: Oxford
      University Press.
─ . 1993. The Right of Self-Determination — A Time for
      Reinvention and Renewal. Saskatchewan Law Review 57:1-20.
Kellogg, Thomas E., and Eric Yan-Ho Lai. 2021. The Tong Ying-Kit NSL
      Verdict: An International and Comparative Law Analysis. In
      Georgetown Center For Asian Law, https://www.law.georgetown.
      edu/law-asia/wp-content/uploads/sites/31/2021/10/TongYingKitVer
      dictGCAL.pdf.
Lee, Martin. 1988. A Tale of Two Articles. Pp. 309-325 in The Basic
      Law and Hong Kong’s Future, edited by Peter Wesley-Smith and
      Albert H.Y. Chen. Hong Kong: Butterworths.
Lim, C.L., and Johannes M.M. Chan. 2011. Autonomy and Central-
      Local Relations. Pp. 37-74 in Law of the Hong Kong Constitution,
      edited by Johannes M.M. Chan and C.L. Lim. Hong Kong: Sweet
      & Maxwell.
Lo, P.Y. 2020. The Unprosecuted Taiwan Homicide, the Unaccepted
      Extradition Law Amendment Bill and the Underestimated Common
      Law. Hong Kong Law Journal 50:373-394.
Morgenbesser, Lee. 2020. The Rise of Sophisticated Authoritarianism in
      Southeast Asia. London: Cambridge University Press.
Mushkat, Roda. 1993. Hong Kong’s Quest for Autonomy: A Theoretical
      Enforcement. Pp. 307-341 in Hong Kong, China and 1997: Essays
      in Legal Theory, edited by Raymond Wacks. Hong Kong: Hong
      Kong University Press.
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?                       241


─. 1997. One Country, Two International Legal Personalities: The
     Case of Hong Kong. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
Petersen, Carole J. 2005. Hong Kong’s Spring of Discontent: The Rise
     and Fall of the National Security Bill in 2003. Pp. 13-62 in National
     Security and Fundamental Freedoms: Hong Kong’s Article 23
     under Scrutiny, edited by Hualing Fu, Carole J. Petersen and Simon
     N.M. Young. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
─. 2018. Prohibiting the Hong Kong National Party: Has Hong
     Kong Violated the International Covenant on Civil and Political
     Rights?. Hong Kong Law Journal 48:789-806.
─. 2019. Not an Internal Affair: Hong Kong’s Right to Autonomy
     and Self-Determination under International Law. Hong Kong Law
     Journal 49:883-904.
─. 2020. Article 23 of the Hong Kong Basic Law: International
     Law and Institutions as Sources of Resilience. Pp. 231-250 in
     China’s National Security: Endangering Hong Kong’s Rule of Law?,
     edited by Cora Chan and Fiona de Londras. London: Hart
     Publishing.
─. 2020. The Disappearing Firewall: International Consequences
     of Beijing’s Decision to Impose a National Security Law and
     Operate National Security Institutions in Hong Kong. Hong Kong
     Law Journal 50:633-656.
─ . 2021. Hong Kong’s First Conviction for Incitement to
     Secession: What Role for the ICCPR?. 25(22) American Society of
     International Law, https://www.asil.org/insights/volume/25/issue/22.
─. 2021. Sanctions and Human Rights: Lessons from Hong Kong.
     2(5)     USALI      Perspectives,      https://usali.org/usali-perspectives-
     blog/sanctions-and-human-rights-lessons-from-hong-kong.
Petersen, Carole J., and Alvin Y.H. Cheung. 2017. Academic Freedom
242                              《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



      and Critical Speech in Hong Kong: China’s Response to Occupy
      Central and the Future of “One Country, Two Systems”. North
      Carolina Journal of International Law 42:665-727.
Pomerance, Michla. 1982. Self-Determination in Law and Practice: The
      New Doctrine in the United Nations. Leiden: Martinus Nijhoff
      Publishers.
So, Alvin Y. 2002. Social Protests, Legitimacy Crisis, and the Impetus
      toward Soft Authoritarianism in the Hong Kong SAR. Pp. 399-418
      in The First Tung Chee-hwa Administration: The First Five Years of
      the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, edited by Siu-kai
      Lau. Hong Kong: The Chinese University of Hong Kong Press.
Trinidad, Jamie. 2018. Self-Determination in Disputed Colonial
      Territories. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Weller, Marc. 2011. Introduction. Pp. 1-14 in Asymmetric Autonomy and
      the Settlement of Ethnic Conflicts, edited by Marc Weller and
      Katherine Nobbs. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania
      Press.
Weng, Byron S.J. 1997. Mainland China, Taiwan, and Hong Kong as
      International Actors. Pp. 40-78 in Hong Kong’s Reunion with China:
      The Global Dimensions, edited by Gerard A. Postiglione and James
      T.H. Tang. London: Routledge.
Wesley-Smith, Peter. 1998. Unequal Treaty, 1898-1997: China, Great
      Britain, and Hong Kong’s New Territories. Revised ed. Hong Kong:
      Oxford University Press.
Wolff, Stefan, and Marc Weller. 2005. Self-determination and Autonomy:
      A Conceptual Introduction. Pp. 1-25 in Autonomy, Self-governance
      and Conflict Resolution: Innovative Approaches to Institutional
      Design in Divided Societies, edited by Stefan Wolff and Marc
      Weller. London: Routledge.
Territorial Autonomy as a Tool of Conflict Resolution?           243


Wong, Lydia, and Thomas E. Kellogg. 2021. Hong Kong’s National
     Security Law: A Human Rights and Rule of Law Analysis. In
     Georgetown Center for Asian Law, http://www.law.georgetown.
     edu/law-asia/wp-content/uploads/sites/31/2021/02/GT-HK-Report-
     Accessible.pdf.
Woodman, Sophia, and Yash Ghai. 2013. Comparative Perspectives on
     Institutional Frameworks for Autonomy. Pp. 449-486 in Practising
     Self-Government: A Comparative Study of Autonomous Regions,
     edited by Yash Ghai and Sophia Woodman. Cambridge: Cambridge
     University Press.
Wu, Jianfan. 1988. Several Issues Concerning the Relationship between
     the Central Government of the People’s Republic of China and the
     Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. Journal of Chinese
     Law 2:65-82.
Young, Simon N.M. 2015. Rethinking the Process of Political Reform in
     Hong Kong. Hong Kong Law Journal 45:381-388.
