    Hong Kong’s Changing Rule of Law
Academia Sinica Law Journal                                                      39
2022 Special Issue, pp. 39-101 (May 2022)


                                                                                      ＊
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong:
                                  One Year On

                                                       ＊＊
                           Johannes M.M. Chan


                                      Abstract
      Enacted by the National People’s Congress for the HKSAR, the
National Security Law (NSL), which came into effect on 30 June 2021,
has changed the social, legal and political landscape in Hong Kong in a
most pervasive manner. This article examines the constitutional, legal
and social impact of the NSL, and how it affects the nature and prospect
of the “One Country, Two Systems” constitutional model in the HKSAR.
It challenges the raison d’etre of enacting the NSL that there is a failure
of the HKSAR to discharge its constitutional duty to enact national
security law under Article 23 of the Basic Law. Apart from enhancing
the protection of national security, it is argued that NSL further serves
the dual purposes of implementing of the Mainland Government’s
conception of “full jurisdiction” over Hong Kong and of containing the
judiciary. Sadly, it finds the performance of the judiciary in protecting
fundamental rights under the NSL less than encouraging. It concludes
that the NSL underlines the Mainland’s blueprint of “One Country, Two
Systems”, the goal of which is to maintain an economic system in Hong
Kong that is run by patriots who would not challenge the authority of the

＊  I am grateful to Hong Kong University Press for granting permission to reproduce
   part of my chapter National Security and Judicial Independence: A Clash off
   Fundamental Values, in HONG KONG’S NATIONAL SECURITY LAW: RESTORATION
   AND TRANSFORMATION (Hualing Fu and Michael Hor eds., forthcoming 2022).
＊＊ Professor Johannes M.M. Chan, former Chair of Public Law, The University of Hong
   Kong; Visiting Professor, University College London.
   Online: http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/92014022.pdf.
40                                 《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）


executive government, and who are supported by a compliant legislature
and a deferential judiciary. It highlights the room for a responsive
judiciary under such constraints, but it argues that the hope of
maintaining an independent judiciary is less than optimistic.

KEYWORDS: National Security Law, judicial independence, “One
          Country, Two Systems”, Basic Law Article 23, incitement
          to secession, designated judges, presumption of bail, right
          to jury trial.



                                   Contents

 I.      Background Leading to the Enactment of the NSL
 II.     Two Fallacies
 III.    Three Main Purposes of the NSL and the Distrust of the Judiciary
 IV.     Judicial Responses to the NSL
 V.      Other Legal, Political and Social Impact of the NSL
 VI.     Conclusion




        The 23rd anniversary of the establishment of the Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region (HKSAR) was met with the imposition of
the National Security Law (NSL). Enacted by the National People’s
Congress (NPC) for the HKSAR, the NSL was pushed through the
legislative process within a short period of time without any meaningful
consultation of the people of Hong Kong, and since its enactment, it has
changed the social, legal and political landscape in Hong Kong in a most
pervasive manner. This article examines the constitutional, legal and
social impact of the NSL, and how it affects the nature and prospect of
the “One Country, Two Systems” constitutional model in the HKSAR.
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                41


Part I of the article sets out the background leading to the enactment of
the NSL. Part II challenges the argument that there is a failure of the
HKSAR to discharge its constitutional duty to enact national security
law under article 23 of the Basic Law (The Basic Law of the Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China). Part
III identifies three objectives of the NSL. Apart from enhancing the
protection of national security, it is argued that NSL further serves the
dual purposes of implementing the Mainland Government’s conception
of “full jurisdiction” over the HKSAR and of containing the judiciary.
Part IV examines the case law under the NSL and argues that the
performance of the judiciary in protecting fundamental rights under the
NSL is less than encouraging. Part V highlights other legal, political and
social impact of the NSL. Part VI concludes that the NSL underlines the
Mainland’s blueprint of “One Country, Two Systems”. It is really about
“One Country, Two Economic Systems”, under which the goal is to
maintain an economic system in Hong Kong that is run by patriots who
would not challenge the authority of the executive government, and who
are supported by a compliant legislature and a deferential judiciary. The
article further explores the room for a responsive judiciary under such
constraints, but it argues that the hope of maintaining an independent
judiciary is less than optimistic.


I. Background Leading to the Enactment of the NSL

     Under the One Country, Two Systems constitutional model, the
HKSAR is to retain its economic, legal, and social systems. Over the
years, with rapid economic development in the Mainland and the
extensive interaction of people through business and travel, the legal
system is now the only major difference between the two systems. The
42                                    《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



difference is ideological in nature. On one side of the border, the
common law system is built upon western ideas of liberalism and
individualism, with a strong emphasis on protection of fundamental
rights and freedoms, which are institutionally protected, among other
things, by an independent judiciary. There is strong acceptance of the
rule of law, which is built upon an aspiration for democracy and a
diverse civil society. On the other side of the border, there is a one-party
system which ideologically rejects a separation of powers and expects a
compliant judiciary. The function of law is primarily to maintain law and
order and to implement state policies rather than to control state power.
The interpretation of law, the power of which is vested in a political
organ, is a political process that could be determined by expediency
rather than an objective analysis undertaken by an independent judiciary
that is constrained by the language of the law.

       As time passes, these ideological conflicts became intensified.
There is a strong social demand in Hong Kong for a faster pace of
democratization as well as an active judiciary that is ready and willing to
subject executive and legislative acts to judicial scrutiny. The Central
               1
Government was skeptical of the democratization movement, worrying
that such development would weaken its control over the HKSAR and
turn the HKSAR into a subversive base against the sovereign. The
former concern has led to repeated assertions since the outbreak of the
Occupy Central Movement in 2014 that the Central Government has full
power of control over the HKSAR; the latter concern, in light of the
deteriorating international relationship with the United States and its
allies, has fostered an exaggerated sense of national insecurity. The


1    The term “Central Government” is used generically to include the Central People’s
     Government or the National People’s Congress, as the case may be.
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                         43


response is a clear shift towards One Country in the One Country, Two
                                    2
Systems constitutional model.

     The immediate triggering incident is the abortive attempt to enact
                                3
the Extradition Bill in 2019. Taking advantage of a sensational murder
case in Taiwan where the suspect was in Hong Kong, the HKSAR
Government claimed that it was necessary to plug a legal loophole as
there was no extradition arrangement with Taiwan. Yet instead of
focusing on the extradition arrangement with Taiwan, the Extradition
Bill allows extradition of Hong Kong residents to the Mainland. This has
sparked off the fear of many people of a demolition of the only legal
firewall between the two legal systems. The Bill received strong
opposition, and when the Government was prepared to rely on its
support in the Legislative Council to push through the Bill, protestors
stormed the Legislative Council in June 2019 which effectively halted
the passage of the Bill. This incident is significant in four respects. First,
this was the first time in the history of the HKSAR that public
demonstration has turned into violence. Secondly, the success in halting
the passage of the Bill convinced the more radical fraction of the
protestors that peaceful demonstrations would not be effective. Had it
not been the protestors storming the Legislative Council, the Extradition
Bill would have become law. In the following months, the community
witnessed an increasing number of violent public demonstrations and


2 For a more detailed discussion, see Johannes M.M. Chan, A Shrinking Space: A
  Dynamic Relationship between the Judiciary in a Liberal Society of Hong Kong and
  the Socialist-Leninist Sovereign State, 72 CURRENT LEGAL PROBS. 85 (2019).
3 For a more detailed discussion, see Albert H.Y. Chen, A Perfect Storm: Hong Kong-
  China Rendition of Fugitive Offenders, 2019, 49 HKLJ 419 (2019); Johannes M.M.
  Chan, Ten Days that Shock the World: The Rendition Proposal in Hong Kong, 49
  HKLJ 431 (2019); Cora Chan, Demise of “One Country, Two Systems”? Reflections
  on the Hong Kong Rendition Sage, 49 HKLJ 447 (2019).
44                                  《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



confrontations. The stubborn refusal of the Government to withdraw the
Extradition Bill has also resulted in greater public tolerance of more
radical strategies in public demonstrations, and in a way sidelined the
moderate voice in the democratic movement. Thirdly, the Extradition
Bill has reminded the public of the lack of respect for fundamental rights
and the right to fair trial in the criminal justice system in the Mainland.
Fourthly, it also brought to the forefront the undemocratic nature of the
Legislative Council. The functional constituency system, which is an
election among the elites, returns half of the members of the Legislative
Council who are largely pro-establishment. Until the 2016 election, the
pan-democratic fraction consistently won about 60% of all votes in all
elections, yet this gave them only around 30% of all seats in the
Legislative Council and rendered them a forever minority. This incident
reinforced the demand for the early introduction of a fully elected
Legislative Council by universal suffrage, a goal that was promised in
                 4
the Basic Law.

       In the following months, violent confrontations between the police
and the protesters escalated. Public transport and businesses were
paralysed; public facilities were damaged; there were major incidents of
arson and personal attacks. Many Mainland institutions became the
targets of attack. In the meantime, while the police were under immense
pressure to maintain law and order, there were also numerous reported
incidents that the police responded with excessive force and brutality. In
October 2019, the Chief Executive in Council invoked emergency power
to introduce the Prohibition of Facial Recognition Regulation (the Anti-
Mask Regulation), which prohibited the wearing of masks in all public


4    The Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s
     Republic of China [hereinafter Basic Law] art. 67 (H.K.).
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                               45


demonstrations, including peaceful and lawful demonstrations. Twenty-
four legislators from the pan-democratic camp soon launched a judicial
review to challenge the constitutionality of both the Emergency
Regulations Ordinance and the Anti-Mask Regulation. In November
2019, the Court of First Instance held that the Emergency Power
Regulations and some parts of the Anti-Mask Law were inconsistent
                                                      5
with the Basic Law and hence null and void.

      While peace and order were largely restored in the early part of
2020 due to the outbreak of the pandemic, the Central Government took
the view that the violent demonstrations were supported, if not instigated,
by foreign elements. This period coincided with the strained relationship
between China and the United States. The condemnation of the foreign
governments against the HKSAR Government for using excessive force
against peaceful protesters strengthened the suspicion of the Central
Government of foreign interference in the violent protests. It also
considered that the matter has gone out of hand of the HKSAR
Government and drastic action was required to restore law and order and
to protect national security. The NSL was prepared in the spring of 2020.
Despite its sweeping nature, it was enacted without any meaningful
participation of the people of Hong Kong, let alone that it was published
for the first time only after it has come into effect.




5   Kwok Wing Hang and others v. Chief Executive in Council and another, [2020] 1
    H.K.L.R.D. 1 (C.F.I.). The decision was subsequently reversed, partially by the Court
    of Appeal, [2020] 2 H.K.L.R.D. 771 (C.A.) and entirely by the Court of Final Appeal,
    (2020) 23 H.K.C.F.A.R. 518 (C.F.A.).
46                                    《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



II. Two Fallacies

       Article 23 of the Basic Law provides that the HKSAR Government
“shall enact laws on its own to prohibit any act of treason, secession,
sedition, subversion against the Central People’s Government, or theft of
state secrets, to prohibit foreign political organizations or bodies from
conducting political activities in the Region, and to prohibit political
organizations or bodies of the Region from establishing ties with foreign
political organizations or bodies.” In 2003, the HKSAR Government
tried to introduce national security law, but it received strong public
              6
opposition. After a million people took to the street and the deflection
of the Liberal Party to support the National Security Bill, the
Government withdrew the Bill and since then there was no further
attempt to introduce national security law. The enactment of the NSL by
the NPC is defended on the ground that as the HKSAR has failed to
discharge its constitutional duty to enact national security law, it is
legitimate and lawful for the Central Government to enact national
security law for Hong Kong. This argument involves two assumptions.
First, the HKSAR has failed to discharge its constitutional duty under
article 23 to protect national security. Second, the NPC could enact
national security law without being subject to the constraints in the Basic
Law. Both assumptions are doubtful.

       On the first assumption, the purpose of article 23 is to impose a
duty on the HKSAR to enact law to protect national security, but it does



6    For a detailed account of the 2003 incident, see Carole J. Petersen, Hong Kong’s
     Spring of Discontent: The Rise and Fall of the National Security Bill in 2003, in
     NATIONAL SECURITY AND FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS: HONG KONG’S ARTICLE 23
     UNDER SCRUTINY 13 ( Hualing Fu et al. eds., 2005).
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                             47


not prescribe the means of implementation, let alone that the only means
of implementation is by the enactment of a specific statute on national
security. Colonial law did provide for offences against treason and
various offences against the Crown, including incitement to mutiny and
                             7
seditious publication.           Upon the change of sovereignty, the
Interpretation and General Clauses Ordinance was amended by the Hong
Kong Reunification Ordinance so that section 2A(1) of the Interpretation
and General Clauses Ordinance states that “all laws previously in force
shall be construed with such modifications, adaptations, interpretations
and exceptions as may be necessary so as not to contravene the Basic
Law and to bring them into conformity with the status of Hong Kong as
a Special Administration Region of the People’s Republic of China.” In
particular, Schedule 8 of the Ordinance expressly provides that “any
reference in any provision to Her Majesty, the Crown, the British
Government or the Secretary of State (or to similar names, terms or
expressions) where the content of the provision… (b) involves affairs for
which the Central People’s Government of the People’s Republic of
China has responsibility; (c) involves the relationship between the
Central Authorities and the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region,
shall be construed as a reference to the Central People’s Government or
                                                                             8
other competent authorities of the People’s Republic of China.” Thus,
in one stroke, the offences against the Crown in the Crimes Ordinance
were amended to become offences against the Central People’s
               9
Government. The Public Order Ordinance and the Societies Ordinance

7 Crimes Ordinance, (2021) Cap. 200, Parts I and II (H.K.).
8 Interpretation and General Clauses Ordinance, (2021) Cap. 1, § 2A(3) and Schedule 8
  (H.K.).
9 It is unfortunate that the Department of Justice did not update the relevant statutes
  with this general amendment and hence it gives a misleading impression that the
  relevant law is still directed at the British Crown.
48                                   《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



were also amended to repeal the liberal amendments that were
                                                                             10
introduced by the colonial Government shortly before 1997.                         The
Official Secrets Ordinance prohibited espionage and unlawful disclosure,
                                        11
including the offence of spying.             Part III of the Ordinance prohibits
unlawful disclosure of security and intelligence information, which
                                                                                    12
includes damaging disclosure of information relating to defence,
                              13
international relations,           commission of offences and criminal
                 14                                                           15
investigation,         as well as information resulting from spying                and
entrusted    in       confidence   to   territories,    States     or   international
                  16
organizations.          Disclosure of information relating to defence is
damaging if the disclosure “endangers the interest of the People’s
Republic of China or Hong Kong elsewhere, seriously obstructs the
promotion or protection by the People Republic of China (PRC) or Hong
Kong of those interests or endangers the safety of Chinese nationals or
                                                       17
Hong Kong permanent residents elsewhere.”                   It has been said that the
existing law does not cover secession and subversion. Yet it is difficult to


10 The amendments to the Public Order Ordinance in 1995 and the Societies Ordinance
   in 1992 that liberalised respectively the control on public assemblies and societies
   were among the law that the NPCSC decided as inconsistent with the Basic Law:
   Decision of the NPCSC Concerning the Handling of the Laws Previously in Force in
   Hong Kong in accordance with article 160 of the Basic Law of the HKSAR of the
   PRC (Adopted at the 24th Meeting of the Standing Committee of the 8th NPC on Feb.
   23, 1997: HK Constitutional Instrument A206.) The pre-amended Public Order
   Ordinance and the Societies Ordinance were brought back to force by the Provisional
   Legislative Council in 1997.
11 Official Secrets Ordinance, (2020) Cap. 521, § 3 (H.K.).
12 Id. § 15.
13 Id. § 16.
14 Id. § 17.
15 Id. § 19.
16 Id. § 20.
17 Official Secrets Ordinance, (2020) Cap. 521, § 15(2) (H.K.), as modified by
   Interpretation and General Clauses Ordinance, (2021) Cap. 1, § 2A(3) and Schedule 8
   (H.K.).
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                                49


see why they are not included in the treasonable offences, which include,
reading in light of section 2A(1) and Schedule 8 of the Interpretation and
General Clauses Ordinance, any overt act or publication with intention
to dispose the Central People’s Government of the People’s Republic of
         18
China.         These amendments put it beyond doubt that the HKSAR
Government has amended existing laws to protect national security of
the People’s Republic of China pursuant to its constitutional duties under
article 23 of the Basic Law.

      Nor is there any evidence to suggest that these laws are inadequate
                                 19
to protect national security.         The evidence is, indeed, quite the contrary.
The Secretary for Security has the power to prohibit the operation of a
society if he reasonably believes that its prohibition is necessary in the
interests of national security or public safety, or if the society is a
political body that has a connection with a foreign political organization
                                              20
or a political organization in Taiwan.             The Hong Kong National Party,
which advocated the independence of Hong Kong, was declared an
unlawful society under the Societies Ordinance, and as a result, any
                                                                                       21
office bearer, any person managing or assisting in the management,
and any person providing financial or other aids to the unlawful
          22                                                                     23
society        commits an offence. In HKSAR v. Tam Tak Chi,                           the


18 Crimes Ordinance, (2021) Cap. 200, § 3 (H.K.). Note also the broadly defined
   sedition offence in §§ 9 and 10, which are also wide enough to cover secession or
   subversion.
19 It was suggested that these colonial laws may not pass muster the Bill of Rights or the
   Basic Law. This is a weird argument, as it boils down to this: as the colonial laws may
   violate the Bill of Rights, the solution is to adopt even more draconian law and
   exclude any scrutiny from the Bill of Rights and the Basic Law.
20 Societies Ordinance, (2021) Cap. 151, § 8(1) and (3) (H.K.).
21 Id. § 19.
22 Id. § 20(1).
23 Candice Chau, Hong Kong Democrat Tam Tak-chi Faces 13 Months on Remand as
50                                   《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



defendant was charged with uttering seditious words contrary to section
10 of the Crimes Ordinance for chanting various slogans in public. In
July 2021, five members of a pro-democracy Hong Kong union that
published children’s books about sheep trying to hold back wolves from
                                             24
their village were arrested for sedition.         Since the outbreak of the social
unrest in 2019, over 10,200 protesters have been arrested; among them
more than 600 people were already convicted, with 2,521 charged with a
variety of offences including rioting and unlawful assembly under the
                             25
Public Order Ordinance.           Those who were convicted of the offences of
riot or unlawful assembly have received heavy imprisonment
             26
sentences.        Many legislators and candidates for election have been


   Sedition Trial Suspended until October, HONG KONG FREE PRESS (July 30, 2021),
   https://hongkongfp.com/2021/07/30/hong-kong-democrat-tam-tak-chi-faces-13-months-
   on-remand-as-sedition-trial-suspended-until-october/; Mary Hui, A Law that Once
   Outlawed Insulting the Queen is Now being Used to Stifle Speech in Hong Kong,
   QUARTZ (Sept. 9, 2020), https://qz.com/1901125/hong-kong-uses-colonial-era-sedi
   tion-law-to-stifle-speech/.
24 Agence France-Presse, Five Arrested in Hong Kong for Sedition over Children’s Book
   about Sheep, THE GUARDIAN (July 22, 2021), https://www.theguardian.com/world/
   2021/jul/22/five-arrested-in-hong-kong-for-sedition-over-childrens-book-about-sheep.
25 Ng Kang-chung, Hong Kong Protests: More than 10,200 Arrested in Connection with
   Unrest since 2019, Government Tells Lawmakers, SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST (Apr.
   9, 2021), https://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/politics/article/3128836/hong-kong
   -protests-more-10200-arrested-connection-unrest.
26 See, for example, Brain Wong, Hong Kong Protests: Four Jailed for Up to 56 Months
   over National Day Riot, Judge Says Non-Violent Participants at Scene Share
   Culpability, SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST (May 5, 2021), https://www.scmp.com/
   news/hong-kong/hong-kong-economy/article/3132366/hong-kong-protests-four-jailed-
   56-months-over; Helen Davidson & Agencies, Hong Kong Court Jails Three on Riot
   Charges Despite No Evidence of Rioting, THE GUARDIAN (May 6, 2021),
   https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/may/06/hong-kong-court-jails-riot-charges-
   joshua-wong-tiananmen-vigil-protest; Jennifer Jett & Austin Ramzy, From Protester
   to Prisoner: How Hong Kong Is Stifling Dissent, N.Y. TIMES (Sept. 5, 2021),
   https://www.nytimes.com/2021/05/28/world/asia/hong-kong-arrests-court.html; Hong
   Kong Activists Jailed for Unauthorised Protest in 2020, ALJAZEERA (Oct. 16, 2021),
   https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2021/10/16/seven-hong-kong-activists-jailed-over-
   unauthorised-protest-in-2020.
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                             51


disqualified for failing to meet the oath requirement of upholding the
                                                                27
Basic Law and swearing allegiance to the HKSAR.                      Indeed, the fact
that there is no incident suggesting national security has been
compromised in the last twenty-three years is already the best evidence
that there are sufficient laws in Hong Kong to protect national security!

     Thus, it is patently wrong to suggest that the HKSAR has failed to
discharge its constitutional duties to protect national security under
article 23. Amendments to pre-existing laws were made to protect
national security of the sovereign since the changeover. It must be within
the autonomy of the HKSAR to decide how best to implement article 23.
Whether these legislative amendments are adequate to protect national
security is a different question. It must be fundamental to the
maintenance of two systems that the Central Government would not
make law for Hong Kong except in clearly defined exceptional
circumstances. It would be a dangerous proposition that the Central
Government could intervene and make law for Hong Kong on a bare
allegation that the efforts of the HKSAR Government are inadequate, as
this could apply to any area of law and would effectively take away the



27 A number of disqualified legislators/candidates challenged the decision of
   disqualification, but most challenges were unsuccessful. See, for example, Chan Ho
   Tin v. Lo Ying Ki Alan and others, [2018] 2 H.K.L.R.D. 7 (C.F.I.); Chow Ting v. Teng
   Yu Yan Anne (Returning Officer for the Hong Kong Island Geographical Constituency)
   and another, [2019] 4 H.K.L.R.D. 459 (C.F.I.); Chan Tak Cheung and another v.
   Electoral Affairs Commission, HCAL 134/2016 (C.F.I. Dec. 7, 2018) (Legal Reference
   System) (H.K.); Secretary for Justice v. Leung Kwok Hung, CACV 200/2017 (C.F.A.
   Feb. 15, 2019) (Legal Reference System) (H.K.); Wong Tai Hoi v. Au Nok Hin and
   another, [2018] 2 H.K.L.R.D. 789 (C.F.I.); Yau Wai Ching v. Chief Executive of the
   HKSAR, Secretary for Justice, (2017) 20 H.K.C.F.A.R. 390 (C.F.A.); Chief Executive
   of the HKSAR and another v. President of the Legislative Council, [2017] 4 H.K.L.R.D.
   115 (C.F.I.). See also Benny Tai, Round Three of Hong Kong’s Constitutional Game:
   From Semi-Democracy to Semi-Authoritarianism, 49 HKLJ 335 (2019).
52                              《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



legislative autonomy of the HKSAR.

     Even assuming that the HKSAR has to enact a specific law on
national security and has failed to do so, it does not necessarily follow
that the Central Government could then enact law for the HKSAR.
Article 23 provides that HKSAR shall enact national security law “on its
own”. This phrase was inserted to allay the fear of the people of Hong
Kong of the application of anti-revolutionary law of the Mainland to
Hong Kong. While anti-revolutionary crime has been repealed on the
Mainland, the fear of Hong Kong people, namely the fear of an
extension of arbitrary and draconian political offences on the Mainland
to the HKSAR, remains the same, as witnessed by the strong public
reaction to the proposed Extradition Bill in 2019. While it is recognized
that the HKSAR has a duty to protect national security, the phrase “on its
own” in article 23 ensures that this is done within the confines of
common law tradition and principles so that there would be a proper
balance between protection of national security and fundamental rights.
Hence, the phrase “on its own” serves two purposes. First, it serves as a
procedural restriction on the residual power of the Central Government
to enact law on national defence. While it is not in dispute that the
Central Government must have a power to enact law on national defence
for the HKSAR, this power is of a residual nature and should not be
exercised as long as article 23 delegates the power to enact national
security law to the HKSAR. If the Central Government is to exercise this
residual power, it should first amend article 23 by repealing the phrase
“on its own”.

     The argument that the Central Government has a concurrent power
to enact national security law for the HKSAR at any time is not
persuasive. Firstly, this argument is not supported by the drafting history
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                             53


and would render the phrase “on its own” practically redundant and
meaningless. It could not have allayed the fear of the Hong Kong people
if the Central Government retained a concurrent power that could be
exercised at any time as it decided. It would be highly doubtful that the
Sino-British Joint Declaration or the Basic Law would be acceptable to
the people of Hong Kong if this had been made clear to them at the time
of the promulgation of the Joint Declaration or the drafting of the Basic
Law. Secondly, this phrase also imposes a restriction on the substantive
content of any national security law that is to apply to Hong Kong. The
law should be consistent with the core values of the common law system,
including the principle of legality and proportionality. The law should
not be so vague that its effect is not reasonably foreseeable, and there
should be a proper balance between the protection of national security
and respect for fundamental rights. In enacting the NSL for the HKSAR,
the Central Government simply side-stepped the restriction in article 23
as if it were not binding on the Central Government. The very concept of
the rule of law requires a government to abide by its own law which,
unfortunately, is not a view that is taken seriously, if at all, by the Central
Government.



III. Three Main Purposes of the NSL and the Distrust
     of the Judiciary

     The NSL is the only piece of legislation that was drafted by the
NPC for the HKSAR without any meaningful participation of the people
                  28
of Hong Kong.          It serves three main purposes. The first purpose is to


28 The Basic Law was drafted with substantial participation of the people of Hong Kong.
54                                     《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）


                                                                                  29
introduce a range of national security offences to the HKSAR.                          It
creates four main categories of offences: secession, subversion, terrorist
activities, and collusion with a foreign country or external elements to
endanger national security. Unlike the common law tradition of
legislative drafting, these offences are vague and sweeping, and backed
up by heavy mandatory minimum sentences. Unlike the offence of
subversion, the offence of secession can be committed “whether or not
                                  30
by force or threat of force.”          A person could also be guilty of inciting
others to commit the offence of secession, which could be based on a
                                                   31
verbal and peaceful act without any action.

      The second purpose is to implement the Mainland conception of
“full jurisdiction” (全面管治) over the HKSAR. While article 23 of the
Basic Law envisages that the national security law is to be administered
by the HKSAR, new structures are established under the NSL that allow
Mainland officials to have a formal and official role in the governance of
               32
the HKSAR.

      The third purpose is to weaken the judiciary. The Central
Government has long been sceptical of the independence of the judiciary.
As early as in 2008 when Xi Jinping was still the Vice-Premier of China,
he expressed the view during his visit to Hong Kong that the executive,
the legislature and the judiciary should mutually accommodate and


   The Garrison Law applied only to the People’s Liberation Army stationed in Hong
   Kong and there were also substantial inputs from Hong Kong.
29 For a general critique of the NSL, see Carole J. Petersen, The Disappearing Firewall:
   International Consequences of Beijing’s Decision to Impose a National Security Law
   and Operate National Security Institutions in Hong Kong, 50 HKLJ 633 (2020).
30 Basic Law art. 20 (H.K.).
31 HKSAR v. Ma Chun Man, DCCC 122/2021 (D.C. Nov. 11, 2021) (Legal Reference
   System) (H.K.).
32 See infra Section III. C.
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                              55


                                                      33
support one another (互相理解，互相支持).                            The principle of mutual
support was reiterated again in the White Paper on One Country, Two
Systems, which was issued in June 2014 shortly before the outbreak of
                                       34
the Occupy Central Movement.                The White Paper treated judges as
part of the government administration and required judges, alongside
                                                                 35
other administrators of the HKSAR, to be patriotic.                   It underlined the
Central     Government’s        dissatisfaction      with       the    judiciary,   and
foreshadowed the position that the doctrine of separation of powers was
                                                           36
the synonym of dominance of the judiciary.                      The decision of the
Standing Committee of the NPC (NPCSC) to make an interpretation on
the requirements of a valid oath under article 104 of the Basic Law
shortly before the court was to render a judgment on the disqualification
of two legislators for failing to take the legislative oath upon assumption
of office is the most blatant example of the Mainland’s distrust of the
                           37
Hong Kong judiciary.            On 1 September 2020, the Chief Executive


33 Xi Jinping 08 Nian Yi Chang Hezuo Linzheng 12 Nian Hou Zhongjie Sanquanfenlilun
   (習近平08年已倡「合作」 林鄭12年後終結「三權分立論」), APPLE DAILY (Sept.
   1, 2020), https://collection.news/appledaily/articles/K4FXZI4AJZA6XH52CU6ILX
   KHUY. In refute, the Hong Kong Bar Association pointed out that the judiciary is not
   part of the executive government.
34 White Paper on the Practice of the ‘One Country, Two Systems’ Policy in the Hong
   Kong Special Administrative Region, THE STATE COUNCIL THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF
   CHINA (June 10, 2014), http://english.www.gov.cn/archive/white_paper/2014/08/23/
   content_281474982986578.htm.
35 Id. at Section V(3).
36 The former Chief Justice sought to explain that judges owe only a duty to the law and
   the requirement of patriotism would be satisfied by taking the judicial oath to
   faithfully and impartially apply the law: Peter So, Judges Don’t Need to be Patriots,
   Says Former Top Judge Andrew Li, SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST (Aug. 15, 2014),
   https://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/article/1573867/judges-dont-need-be-patriots-
   andrew-li.
37 Chief Executive and Secretary for Justice v. President of Legislative Council, [2016]
   6 H.K.C. 417 (C.F.I.); Chief Executive and Secretary for Justice v. President of
   Legislative Council, [2017] 1 H.K.L.R.D. 460 (C.A.); Yau Wai Ching v. Chief
56                                   《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



declared that the constitutional system in Hong Kong was never one of
separation of powers. She stated that the three institutions are all
accountable to the Central Government under an executive-led system of
                                                                       38
governance and the three institutions should work together.                 This was
generally perceived to be targeted at the judiciary. Shortly thereafter,
Zhang Xiaoming, Deputy Director of Hong Kong and Macau Affairs
Office, commented without any details that it was an appropriate time to
                                                  39
consider judicial reforms in Hong Kong.                This was the first time a
senior Chinese government official called for judicial reform in Hong
Kong. He further reiterated that patriotism was a legal requirement, and
that HKSAR has never practiced separation of powers. In January 2021,
the Hon Tam Yiu Chung, the only Hong Kong member on the NPCSC,
stated that the court should pay greater respect to the power of the
Central Government and the policy-making power of the Executive
Government of the HKSAR. It should not “arbitrarily create new law,
adopt an elitist attitude in discharging its duties, and excessively inflate
                               40
its power and its role”.            The message is clear: the courts have


   Executive of the HKSAR, (2017) 20 H.K.C.F.A.R. 390 (C.F.A.). For a more detailed
   analysis, see Chan, supra note 2.
38 Jennifer Creery, No Separation of Powers in Hong Kong Says Chief Exec. Carrie
   Lam, Despite Previous Comments from Top Judges, HONG KONG FREE PRESS (Sept. 1,
   2020), https://hongkongfp.com/2020/09/01/no-separation-of-powers-in-hong-kong-says-
   chief-exec-carrie-lam-despite-previous-comments-from-top-judges/.
39 Tony Cheung & Lilian Cheng, Beijing Calls for Judicial Reform in Hong Kong,
   Declaring Patriotism is ‘a Legal Requirement Now’, SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST,
   (Nov. 17, 2020), https://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/politics/article/3110123/
   top-beijing-official-tells-hong-kong-legal-summit-time-has; Zhang Xiaoming Yinshu
   Liexianlun, Shi Shihou Jinxing Sifa Gaige (張曉明引述烈顯倫 是時候進行司法改
   革), RTHK (Nov. 17, 2020), https://news.rthk.hk/rthk/ch/component/k2/1560388-20
   201117.htm.
40 Tam Yiu Chung: Sifa Gaige Yingdang Yushi Jujin (譚耀宗：司法改革應當與時俱
   進), HKTKWW (Jan. 11, 2021), https://www.tkww.hk/a/202101/11/AP5ffc17c5e4b0
   60b720375253.html.
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                             57


overstepped the acceptable limits.

     This theme of distrust of the judiciary is evident in the NSL. While
                                                                            41
the NSL is to be interpreted by the Hong Kong judiciary,                         it has
imposed various restrictions on the judiciary. These restrictions can be
grouped under three board categories: (a) general directives; (b)
restrictions removing judicial discretion; and (c) restrictions removing
the jurisdiction of the courts altogether.

A. Policy Directives
     Article 3 of the NSL provides that the judiciary, alongside the
executive authorities and the legislature, shall “effectively prevent,
suppress and impose punishment for any act or activities endangering
national security in accordance with this Law and other relevant laws.”
Article 8 further casts this directive as a constitutional duty of the
judiciary to “fully enforce this Law and the laws in force in the Region
concerning the prevention of, suppression of, and imposition of
punishment for acts and activities endangering national security.” Such
kind of directives is rare in the common law system. To the extent that it
requires the judiciary to enforce the law, it is stating the obvious. The
duty of the judiciary is to impartially and fairly apply and enforce the
law in accordance with evidence. The directive, in contrast, emphasizes
the duty to prevent, suppress, and punish acts and activities endangering
national security, and under article 3, this should be done “effectively.”
Such policy directive is fairly common in mainland legislation and




41 Art. 45 of the NSL provides that the courts in Hong Kong shall handle proceedings in
   relation to the prosecution of offenses endangering national security in accordance
   with the laws of the HKSAR, “unless otherwise provided by this Law.”
58                                     《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）


                                                                                42
serves as an overall policy guide to the interpretation of the law.                  This
directive, which reflects the Chinese approach that the judiciary should
co-operate with other branches of government, could be seen to set the
general tone for the interpretation of the NSL — to err on the strict side
in the interpretation of the NSL. While it is unlikely that the judiciary
would convict without sufficient evidence and the long-term impact of
such directives remains to be seen, the case law so far suggested that the
courts are ready to take an expansive interpretation of national security
offences at the expense of fundamental rights, as well as a greater
readiness to impose a harsh sentence upon conviction of public order
                                                             43
offenses after the coming into force of the NSL.                  Another implication
of the expressed duty to enforce the NSL is that it may serve as an
injunction to the judiciary to challenge the constitutionality of NSL. It
cannot enforce the NSL “effectively” by declaring its provisions
unconstitutional.

B. Restrictions on Judicial Discretion
       The second category of restrictions imposes restrictions on judicial
discretion. Article 42 provides that “no bail shall be granted to a criminal
suspect or defendant unless the judge has sufficient grounds for


42 A similar policy directive appears in the National Anthem Ordinance, which is to
     implement the PRC National Anthem Law.
43 For bail cases, see infra. For public order offenses, see HKSAR v. Wong Chi Fung,
     [2018] 2 H.K.L.R.D 657; HKSAR v. Wong Chi Fung and others, WKCC2289/2020
     (D.C. Dec. 2, 2020) (Legal Reference System) (H.K.), where the court adopted the
     sentencing guidelines for violent behaviour in public assembly and applied them to a
     public assembly with no violence; appeal by Chow Ting was dismissed, see Agnes
     Chow’s Jail Sentence Serves as “Warning to Others”, High Court Says, THE
     STANDARD (Dec. 16, 2020), https://www.thestandard.com.hk/breaking-news/section/
     4/161282/Agnes-Chow's-jail-sentence-serves-as-%22warning-to-others%22,-High-
     Court-says. See also HKSAR v. Chow Nok Hang, (2013) 16 H.K.C.F.A.R. 937
     (C.F.A.), paras. 38-40.
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                        59


believing that the criminal suspect or defendant will not continue to
commit acts endangering national security.” It purports to restrict judicial
discretion over the granting of bail. This article will be considered in
more details in the next section. Suffice to point out that only a handful
of defendants charged with national security offenses have been granted
bail. A lengthy pre-trial detention has a strong chilling effect, and the
readiness to deny bail encourages police practice of arbitrary arrest and
prosecution, especially when the police seem to have adopted an
extremely broad meaning of national security in enforcing the NSL.

     Article 46 provides that in criminal trials before the High Court, the
Secretary for Justice may issue a certificate directing that the case shall
be tried without a jury on the grounds of, among others, the protection of
state secrets, involvement of foreign factors in the case, and the
protection of personal safety of jurors and their family members. These
are extremely broad grounds. Jury has been considered as “the bulwark
of liberty” in the common law system and is regarded as particularly
                                                                44
valuable in trials of offenses of a political nature.                Despite the
shortcomings of the jury system, it is particular significant in political
trials when the conviction has to rest on the conscience of the general
public. Public abhorrence to oppressive prosecution or draconian law
                                                    45
may serve as an ultimate safeguard for liberty.          While the Secretary for
Justice already controls the availability of a jury trial by controlling the
venue of trial, as there is no jury trial at the District Court, article 46
gives the Secretary for Justice a further power to remove jury trials from


44 See, for example, the well-known Ponting case and PATRICK DEVLIN, TRIAL BY JURY
   160-61 (1956).
45 Although there are studies suggesting that Hong Kong jury tends to be more
   conviction-minded than a single judge, these studies are dated and do not cover
   politically sensitive prosecution.
60                                        《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



High Court criminal trials. Once the Secretary for Justice has issued the
certificate, the case shall be tried by a panel of three judges, thus
ensuring that no defendant could be acquitted once they come within the
letters of the NSL.

       Article 47 provides that the courts shall obtain a certificate from the
Chief Executive to certify whether an act involves national security or
whether the relevant evidence involves state secrets when such questions
arise in the course of adjudication, and the certificate is binding on the
courts. Under article 19 of the Basic Law, there is a similar requirement
that the courts shall obtain a certificate from the Chief Executive on
questions of facts concerning acts of state such as defence and foreign
affairs whenever such questions arise in the adjudication of cases, and
such a certificate is likewise binding on the courts. This is to a large
extent an echo of the common law evidential principles of fact of state.
Article 47 of the NSL goes far beyond article 19 of the Basic Law or the
common law principle in that, first, national security is a much wider
concept than defence and foreign affairs; secondly, article 47 is not
confined to questions of evidence but also the legal definition of whether
an act involves national security. It goes beyond the common law
principle governing acts of state under which it is for the court to
determine whether certain act amounts to an act of state, and the court
will have no jurisdiction after it has determined that the issues before the
                                     46
court involves an act of state.           In contrast, article 47 deprives the court
of the power to determine, as a matter of law, whether any act involves


46 See Mohammed and others v. Ministry of Defence and another [2017] 2 WLR 287
     (UKSC) (appeal taken from Eng.). For a more detailed discussion on acts of state, see
     Johannes M.M. Chan, Maintaining Institutional Strength: The Court, the Act of State
     and the Rule of Law, in CHINA’S NATIONAL SECURITY: ENDANGERING HONG KONG’S
     RULE OF LAW? 251 (Cora Chan & Fiona de Londras eds., 2020).
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                              61


national security. This is particularly worrying as some of the offenses in
the NSL are broadly worded to cover mere speeches without any action,
and such certificate may pre-empt any determination of the causal
relationship and effect between an act and national security, leaving the
courts to decide only the narrow factual questions whether the act has
taken place and by whom. Such an interpretation will drastically reduce
the scope of judicial determination in criminal proceedings. While a
robust court could reject such an interpretation as the determination of
cause and effect must form part and parcel of judicial determination, the
power of final interpretation of article 47, and indeed the entire NSL,
                                                     47
rests not with the courts, but with the NPCSC.

     The most glaring restriction on the judiciary lies in article 44, which
empowers the Chief Executive to designate judges to handle cases
concerning offenses endangering national security. The designation shall
be for one year only, subject to renewal. It sends a worrying message
that some judges are preferred by the government, and the Chief Justice
is not to be trusted to assign the right judge to handle national security
cases. Article 44 expressly states that no judge shall be designated, or if
designated, a judge shall be removed from the designation list if he or
she makes any statement or behaves in any manner endangering national
security during the term of office. While it is certainly inappropriate for a
judge to express his personal view on a social or political event such that
he may be perceived to be biased in discharging his judicial duties, these
are matters that could be dealt with adequately by the judiciary. Article
44 is at best unnecessary as it is already a constitutional requirement for
any judge to be impartial in discharging his or her judicial duties and is


47 Law of the People’s Republic of China on Safeguarding National Security in the
   Hong Kong Special Administrative Region [hereinafter NSL], (2020), § 65 (H.K.).
62                                     《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



at worst an exercise of discipline by the executive government over the
judiciary. Under article 44, “statement or behavior endangering national
security” is far broader than “giving an impression of being bias,” and
could easily be interpreted to mean a disapproval of the judge’s decision
in a particular case, such as a decision to acquit a defendant which the
Central Government considers plainly guilty. While there are established
mechanisms to address judicial bias within the judiciary, it is, under
article 44, for the Chief Executive to decide if the statement or behaviour
of the judge concerned amounts to an act endangering national security,
and the removal from the designation list could serve as a form of
                                        48
summary discipline on the judge.             In HKSAR v. Tong Ying Kit, the court
                                                                 49
rejected a challenge against article 44 as ludicrous,                 suggesting that a
professional judge would not lose his independence or impartiality
merely because he was designated to handle national security cases.
While this is no doubt laudable, it does not explain why the Chief
Executive should be given a power to designate judges in the first place.
Judicial independence means not only actual independence of the judges,
but also public confidence in the independence of the judges. In this
regard, public perception of independence is as important as actual
independence in maintaining the rule of law. It is accepted that there is



48 A worse scenario is that the behaviour of the judge justifying a removal from the
   designation list could form the basis for a charge of a breach of judicial oath, which
   under art. 35, could result in the removal of a judge from his office. A judge under
   this article is treated in the same way as any other public officers. It is unclear how
   this article is to be reconciled with the procedures for protecting removal of judges
   under the Basic Law. The designated judge system was heavily criticized by the
   United Nations (UN) experts: Communique of 6 UN Special Rapporteurs and the
   Vice-Chairman of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention to China on NSL, OL
   CHN 17/2020, (Sept. 1, 2020), https://spcommreports.ohchr.org/TMResultsBase/Do
   wnLoadPublicCommunicationFile?gId=25487.
49 Tong Ying Kit v. HKSAR, [2020] 4 H.K.L.R.D. 382 (C.F.I.), paras. 54, 55, 58, 59, 64.
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                            63


no reason to doubt the actual independence and impartiality of the
designated judges, but the perceived risk that the executive government
could temper with judicial independence by removing a judge from the
designation list is equally damaging to the maintenance of the rule of law.
The public concern is even more justified in the case of magistrates who
do not enjoy security of tenure.

     The Chief Executive justified this requirement by suggesting that
this is no different from designating judges for specialized types of cases
such as Admiralty or Family Law and denied that this would interfere
with judicial independence as it is still for the Chief Justice to assign
designated judges to take charge of national security cases. This is hardly
convincing, as it does not explain why a designation system is needed in
the first place. There is already a serious problem in listing criminal
cases due to a shortage of judges and a large number of prosecutions
                                               50
arising from the confrontations in 2019.            The requirement would only
aggravate the problem of delay, which is particularly serious given most
defendants are denied bail. The designated judge system clearly restricts
the discretion of the Chief Justice and allows the Chief Executive to pick
judges with similar predisposition. The discretion would be non-existent
if only a small number of judges are designated as national security



50 Some of these defendants have their cases listed till 2023 and were denied bail.
   According to an internal survey of the Hong Kong Bar Association, it is not
   uncommon to have up to 1-year pre-trial detention: Bar Circular 090/21 (June 22,
   2021): For concerns on lengthy pre-trial detention under the National Security Law,
   see Sophie Mak, From Bail Bans to Solitary Confinement: Concerns about the
   Treatment of Detained Lawmakers and Protesters #ReleaseMyCandidate, HONG
   KONG WATCH (Dec. 20, 2021), https://www.hongkongwatch.org/all-posts/2021/12/20/
   pol-prisoners-bail-ban; Jennifer Jett & Austin Ramzy, From Protester to Prisoner:
   How Hong Kong is Stifling Dissent, N.Y. TIMES (Sept. 5, 2021), https://www.nytimes.
   com/2021/05/28/world/asia/hong-kong-arrests-court.html.
64                                    《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



judges, which appears to be the case. Ironically, the government refused
to disclose the number and the identity of designated judges on the
ground of protecting the judges concerned. It would also mean that the
removal of designated judges would not be transparent. The refusal to
make disclosure is absurd, but the more worrying concern is the cloak of
secrecy that is to be imposed on judicial determination when open
justice lies at the heart of fair administration of justice.

       Article 63 of the NSL imposes on judges and lawyers a duty of
confidentiality in handling national security cases. Article 41 allows trial
behind closed doors when the trial involves state secrets or public order,
a matter that could be certified by the Chief Executive. When these
provisions are taken together, the system of designated judges could
easily lead to the development of a non-transparent political court for
national security cases. Examples are abundant in history that such kind
of courts is more conducive to achieving injustice than dispensing justice.

C. Ousting the Jurisdiction of the Courts
       The third kind of restrictions is to remove the jurisdiction of the
courts altogether. Article 12 of the NSL requires the HKSAR to set up a
Committee for Safeguarding National Security, which shall be
responsible for affairs relating to and assume primary responsibility for
safeguarding national security in the Region. This high-power
                                                      51
Committee is chaired by the Chief Executive.               Its membership includes


51 NSL § 13 (H.K.). Its members include the Chief Secretary for Administration, the
     Financial Secretary, the Secretary for Justice, the Secretary for Security, the
     Commissioner of Police, the head of the department for safeguarding national
     security of the Hong Kong Police Force established under art. 16 of the NSL, the
     Director of Immigration, the Commissioner of Customs and Excise, and the Director
     of the Chief Executive’s Office. The Secretary-General of the secretariat shall be
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                             65


the National Security Advisor who shall be designated by the Central
People’s Government; the head of the national security unit of the Hong
Kong Police Force, who shall be appointed by the Chief Executive upon
consultation of the Office for Safeguarding National Security of the
Central People’s Government in the HKSAR (National Security Office);
and the Secretary General of the secretariat, who shall be appointed by
the Central People’s Government upon nomination by the Chief
Executive. Their presence ensures strong influence if not also control of
the Central Government. Its functions include formulating policies for
safeguarding national security in the HKSAR, advancing the
development of the legal system and enforcement mechanisms of the
Region for safeguarding national security, and coordinating major work
and significant operations for safeguarding national security in the
HKSAR. These decisions may have major implications for the
community and cover many different policies aspects, including
education. Indeed, the Education Bureau has since mandated the
teaching of national security in primary and secondary school
curriculum and is considering introducing a requirement on all teachers
                                        52
to take an oath of allegiance.               This is the first time since the
establishment of the HKSAR that senior Mainland officials are given an
official position in a government body of the HKSAR, let alone a high
power body with wide-ranging policy making responsibility. Under
article 14, information relating to the work of this Committee shall not


   appointed by the Central People’s Government upon nomination by the Chief
   Executive. It shall also have a National Security Advisor under art. 15, who shall be
   designated by the Central People’s Government.
52 Wu Zhuo An (吳倬安), Jiaoyuju: Zheng Yanjiu Zizhu Xuexiao Jiaoshi Xuanshi Anpai,
   Zhiyuan Jiaoshi Jiaodao Youer Renshi Guojia (教育局：正研究資助學校教師宣誓
   安排、支援教師教導幼兒認識國家), HK01 (Sept. 1, 2021), https://www.hk01.com/
   政情/671023/教育局-正研究資助學校教師宣誓安排-支援教師教導幼兒認識國家.
66                                    《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



be subject to disclosure, and its decisions shall not be amenable to
judicial review.

      Article 48 is another worrying provision that could have long-term
impact. It establishes the powerful National Security Office, which
                                                                           53
represents the Central People’s Government in Hong Kong.                        It is an
intelligence gathering, an advisory, as well as an executive body with
specific powers. Its mandate includes, among other things, collecting
and analyzing intelligence and information concerning national security,
advising the HKSAR on major strategies and important policies for
safeguarding national security, and overseeing, guiding, coordinating
with and providing support to the HKSAR in the performance of its
duties for safeguarding national security, including approaching ordinary
people of Hong Kong. A permanent office will acquire a life of its own,
and this is the first time that national security officers of the Mainland
are given an official presence to carry out official duties in Hong Kong.
A mere visit from the staff of the Office could already pose a threatening
effect on the persons visited, such as the family members of a political
activist. Its staff are under the direct supervision of the national
             54
authorities.      While the staff of this Office are required to abide by the



53 This is the fourth official body of the Central People’s Government in Hong Kong
   after the China Liaison Office, the Office of the Commissioner of the Foreign Affairs
   Ministry, and the Garrison. The relationship among them, and notably between the
   National Security Office and the China Liaison Office, is rather unclear: see NSL §
   52 (H.K.). For a critique, see Petersen, supra note 29.
54 The National Security Office set up its office in Hong Kong within days after the
   NSL was adopted by the NPCSC. It occupied an entire hotel in Causeway Bay
   overlooking Victoria Park, the venue for many major public demonstrations and the
   annual Candle Lights Virgil in commemoration of the 4 June event in Tiananmen
   Square in 1989. Since then a permanent site has been allocated for the National
   Security Office.
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                      67


                       55
laws of the HKSAR,          article 60 ousts the jurisdiction of the court over
the acts performed by the officers of this Office in the course of duty. It
is almost unthinkable that a body with power to interfere with the liberty
and privacy of the people could operate without being subject to the
jurisdiction of the courts.

     The most worrying power of the National Security Office is that it
may, under three situations, exercise jurisdiction over a case concerning
                            56
offenses under the NSL.          These three situations include: (1) the case is
complex due to the involvement of a foreign country or external
elements, thus making it difficult for the HKSAR to exercise jurisdiction
over the case; (2) a serious situation occurs where the HKSAR
government is unable to effectively enforce the NSL; or (3) a major and
imminent threat to national security has occurred. These situations are
vaguely defined, and the only safeguard is a requirement to seek the
approval of the Central People’s Government. The request could be
made by either the HKSAR or the National Security Office. There is
nothing on the procedure or the standard of scrutiny of such requests.
Nor is it likely that the procedure would be transparent. Once the
National Security Office exercises jurisdiction, a defendant would be
taken out of the jurisdiction of the Hong Kong courts. The National
Security Office will initiate investigation into the case (with unspecified
powers), and the defendant will be prosecuted and tried by the mainland
            57
authorities.     This power of the National Security Office poses a serious
threat to the integrity of the criminal justice system in the HKSAR, as a
defendant who has allegedly committed a crime in Hong Kong could be


55 NSL § 50 (H.K.).
56 Id. § 55.
57 Id. §§ 56-58.
68                                    《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



tried in another jurisdiction and loses all the protection that is afforded to
him under the legal system in the HKSAR. Extradition of a fugitive
offender from the HKSAR would at least have to go through a judicial
process so that a judge is satisfied that a prima facie case has been made
out and all the safeguards in an extradition arrangement have been
complied with, whereas under article 55, a person could be removed out
of jurisdiction physically or legally without any transparent procedure or
due process. The Hong Kong courts would have no role to play at all.
The dividing line between the two legal systems becomes extremely
fragile.

       Finally, although the Hong Kong courts would have power to
interpret the NSL, the power of final interpretation is vested in the
           58
NPCSC.          In the mainland legal system, the power of interpretation is a
legislative process that can be invoked to fill a gap in existing legislation.
It can also be exercised at any time. As in the oath case, the NPCSC can
give an interpretation on the issues that the Hong Kong court is to decide
in a pending case so as effectively to direct how the Hong Kong court
                             59
should decide the case.           This power is to ensure that the Hong Kong
courts could not interpret the NSL in a manner that is unacceptable to the
central authorities.

       While it is possible to rationalize some of these provisions, their
cumulative effect is clearly to undermine the dominance of the judiciary
and to keep it under close monitor. Central and comprehensive control is
the key. Thus, while article 4 provides that the rights and freedoms


58 Id. § 65.
59 For a comment of the NPCSC’s exercise of the power of interpretation, see Johannes
     M.M. Chan, Reconciliation of the NPCSC’s Power of Interpretation of the Basic Law
     with the Common Law in the HKSAR, 50 HKLJ 657 (2020).
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                       69


enshrined under the Basic Law and the International Bills of Rights as
applied to Hong Kong shall be protected, it is highly doubtful if the
Central Government would tolerate a decision of the HKSAR court to
strike down any provision of the NSL for contravening the human rights
provisions of the Basic Law or read down any provision in a matter that
is not acceptable to the Central Government. There could still be an
independent judiciary, but it would have little room to manoeuvre.



IV. Judicial Responses to the NSL

     The responses of the judiciary to the NSL are less than encouraging.
The Court of Final Appeal has readily accepted the loss of the
presumption of bail. By setting up a high standard for granting bail, its
decision has resulted in many cases of lengthy pre-trial detention. The
Court of Appeal has played down the time-honoured right to jury trial,
and the Court of First Instance, in convicting the defendant in the first
NSL case, made no reference to the constitutional protection of
fundamental rights at all.

A. Loss of the Presumption of Bail
                                                               60
     In HKSAR v. Tong Ying Kit, the first NSL case,                 the applicant
applied for habeas corpus after he has been refused bail. A Division
Bench comprising Chow J (as he then was) and Lee J held that article 42
did not change the existing legal principles on bail. The court
emphasized that it is under a duty to protect fundamental rights under the
Basic Law and the Bill of Rights, and the provisions of the NSL shall be


60 Tong Ying Kit v. HKSAR, [2020] 4 H.K.L.R.D. 382 (C.F.I.).
70                                   《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



construed, as far as reasonably practical, to be consistent with the Basic
                                                            61
Law and the ICCPR as applied to Hong Kong.                       The court further
added that it should adopt the common law approach in construing the
        62
NSL.         Thus, construing article 42(2) of the NSL in light of the
presumption of innocence, the Divisional Bench held that article 42(2)
merely provided for a specific situation where bail should not be granted
and did not impose absolute prohibition or even a presumption against
      63
bail.      In assessing whether a defendant is likely to continue to commit
acts endangering national security, which is a relevant factor in any bail
application, the court should resolve any reasonable doubt in favor of the
accused person. Thus, the court concluded that while there is a
difference of emphasis between section 9G(1) of the Criminal
Procedures Ordinance (Cap. 221) and article 42 of the NSL, the impact
of article 42 of the NSL is more apparent than real, as the practical
application is unlikely to result in a different outcome in a bail
                                              64
application in the vast majority of cases.

        This is an enlightening judgment where the court tried to reconcile
the NSL with protection of fundamental rights and read down the broad
and sweeping provisions of the NSL. These general principles were
reiterated in the subsequent bail review of this case. However, bail was
eventually refused on consideration of the conventional factors of flight
risk and risk of re-offending, although Lee J held that article 42 did
contemplate that there would be cases where bail might be granted, if



61 Id. at paras. 38-42, 48. The Court also relied on §§ 4 and 5 of the NSL that these
     rights are to be protected.
62 Id. at para. 49.
63 Id. at paras. 36, 48.
64 Id. at paras. 38-45.
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                    71


                                                             65
needed be with the imposition of tailor-made conditions.

      Lee J provided more details in refusing to grant bail in HKSAR v.
                     66
Ma Chun Man.              The defendant was charged with the offence of
incitement to secession contrary to articles 21 and 22 of the NSL. The
charge was based on nineteen incidents during which he chanted various
slogans, including “Hong Kong, the Only Way Out” and “Armed
Revolt.” The defendant argued, inter alia, that there was not a likelihood
of conviction or a likelihood of lengthy sentence. On the first point, it
was argued that articles 21 and 22 did not criminalize “peaceful
advocacy for secessionist ideas,” even though the articles expressly state
that the offence could be committed “whether or not by force or the
threat of force.” It was argued that the phrase “not by force” referred to
“non-violent acts that are both unlawful and unacceptable such as
                                                 67
terrorist acts or other serious unlawful acts.”        The court rejected that
                                                  68
argument as a matter of literal interpretation.        While it accepted that
articles 21 and 22 have to be interpreted purposely and, as far as
reasonably possible, consistently with fundamental rights as protected by
the Basic Law and the Bill of Rights, the court emphasized that articles 1
and 12 of the Basic Law, which provide that Hong Kong is an
inalienable part of China and is only a special administrative region with
a high degree of autonomy, as the foundation of the Basic Law. It also
rejected the argument that the offence in articles 21 and 22, taking into
account the background of the enactment of the NSL, is indefensible in



65 HKSAR v. Tong Ying Kit, [2020] 4 H.K.L.R.D. 416 (C.F.I.).
66 HKSAR v. Ma Chun Man, HCCP 711/2020 (C.F.I. Dec. 29, 2020) (Legal Reference
   System) (H.K.).
67 Id. at paras. 7, 20.
68 Id. at paras. 21-23.
72                                      《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）


                                                       69
light of the guarantee of freedom of expression.            On the likelihood of a
lengthy sentence, while the defendant’s case is not the most serious of its
type, the court indicated that, in light of what was before the court, a
custodial sentence of not less than three months was to be expected.
While these views are necessarily tentative and do not represent the final
view of the court, they appear to be a retraction from the liberal
sentiment as expressed in Tong Ying Kit. They are indicative that the
court is not prepared to read down the offence in articles 21 and 22 or
accept that a peaceful advocacy for secession is protected by the right to
freedom of expression. It also takes a serious view on a conviction of
national security offence where a custodial sentence is to be expected.

       Considering these cases, the decision of Lee J in HKSAR v. Lai
                                        70
Chee Ying came as a surprise,                and as a result it attracted severe
criticism from the pro-China quarter. The applicant, a media mogul and
supporter of democratic movement in Hong Kong, was initially charged
with an offence of fraud and was later charged with an offence of
collusion with a foreign country or foreign elements to endanger national
security. The fraud offence is nothing more than a breach of a condition
of permitted user in a land lease by allowing a secretarial company to
use about 50 sq m or 0.13% of the land, which sounds like a civil matter
inflating into a criminal charge. The court applied the general principles
in bail application and focused on the weight and evidence of the
prosecution case. On the fraud charge, the court found that the evidence
on the element of deceit and dishonesty were in favor of the defendant.



69 Id. at paras. 25-30. The defendant was eventually convicted and sentenced to
     imprisonment of 5 years and 9 months.
70 HKSAR v. Lai Chee Ying, HCCP 727/2020 & HCCP 738/2020 (C.F.I. Dec. 29, 2020)
     (Legal Reference System) (H.K.).
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                                   73


On the national security charge, the charge was primarily based on what
the applicant said in some articles, in interviews with various overseas
media and in Twitter posts. The court found that these views on their
face appeared to be comments and criticisms rather than requests. In
light of the relatively weak prosecution case, the court was prepared to
grant bail, albeit upon very stringent conditions. Apart from a very
substantial cash bail (ten million Hong Kong dollars), the usual reporting
obligations and surrender of all travel documents, the applicant was
required to stay at his residence at all times (except going to court or to
police station for reporting), not allowed to meet with any official of a
foreign government, attend or host any interviews or express any views
in public, including any form of social media. Effectively he was put
under house arrest.
                                                                              71
     The prosecution appealed to the Court of Final Appeal.                        At issue
was whether the court was right to apply the common law principles to
grant bail and the relationship between articles 21 and 22 of the NSL and
the ICCPR as applied to Hong Kong, that is, whether Tong Ying Kit was
rightly decided. This is a fair question of great public importance, and it
is right that the Court of Final Appeal should grant leave. However, what
is surprising is that the Court of Final Appeal then revoked the bail of the
applicant on the ground that since the legal principle that the bail judge
has adopted is arguable, the Court would be seen to treat the bail judge’s
decision as correct by granting bail. This line of reasoning is hardly
convincing. First, the reverse is equally true. By revoking bail the Court



71 HKSAR v. Lai Chee Ying, FAMP 1/2020 (C.F.A. Dec. 31, 2020) (Legal Reference
   System) (H.K.). The Court held that it has no jurisdiction to entertain an appeal on
   bail, but it has jurisdiction to entertain an appeal on a question of law arising from the
   bail application.
74                                   《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



could be seen to treat the bail judge’s decision as incorrect before the
Court has a chance to consider the merits of his decision. Secondly, the
issue is one of law. It is trite that until a court’s decision is reversed by a
higher court, the decision of the lower court on law remains the correct
interpretation of the law. The mere fact that leave to appeal has been
granted does not undermine the authority of the judgment under appeal
                                              72
regarding its interpretation of the law.           Thirdly, while it is possible to
justify the decision of the Court to preserve the status quo before it has
an opportunity to consider what the appropriate bail principles should be,
there is no explanation why the very stringent bail conditions or further
additional restrictions are insufficient to reduce the risk of absconding.
The only consolation is that the Court ordered an expedited hearing of
the appeal within a month, but that is not a sufficient reason to deprive
someone of his liberty.

       The decision of the Court of Final Appeal turned out to be rather
                 73
disappointing.        While the Court held that article 42 of the NSL must be
given a meaning and effect compatible with the rights and freedoms and
the rule of law under articles 4 and 5 of the NSL, this appears to be
nothing more than lip service. The Court readily accepted that the
presumption of bail was reversed by article 42 without explaining how
the reversal of the presumption of bail would be consistent with the
protection of personal liberty and the presumption of innocence under
articles 4 and 5 of the NSL. Instead, it introduced a two-stage test: first,
the court has to determine whether, on all the evidence available, there is



72 A v. Director of Immigration, [2008] 4 H.K.L.R.D. 752 (C.A.), para. 8.
73 HKSAR v. Lai Chee Ying, FACC 1/2021 (C.F.A. Feb. 9, 2021) (Legal Reference
     System) (H.K.). For a more detailed analysis, see Johannes M.M. Chan, Judicial
     Responses to the National Security Law: HKSAR v Lai Chee Ying, 51 HKLJ 1 (2021).
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                   75


any reason to believe that the defendant would not commit any national
security offence whilst on bail. This requires the establishment of a
negative state of affairs. Bail shall be denied unless this negative state of
affairs could be established. It is only when this negative state of affairs
is established the court would then consider other factors pertaining to
normal bail applications, such as the strength of the prosecution case or
the risk of abscond of the defendant. The Court overruled Tong Ying Kit
and acknowledged that the threshold that it imposed for granting bail
was very high. Not surprisingly, very few defendants managed to get
bail after this Court of Final Appeal’s decision.

     There is no legal basis for this two-stage test. The Court of First
Instance’s approach in Tong Ying Kit of giving prominence to the factor
of risk of committing national security offence but without excluding the
consideration and balancing of this factor against other factors, is equally
consistent with the language of article 42 and a better reflection of the
right to be presumed innocent under article 5 of the NSL. The purpose of
bail is to ensure the appearance of a defendant to face the trial, and not to
punish the defendant. It is contrary to the long standing practice that bail
consideration should be a holistic process. It is artificial to separate the
consideration of bail into two stages, and isolating one factor to the
exclusion of other factors in the first stage is unsound in principle. Nor is
there any justification to impose a requirement of satisfaction of a
negative state of affairs, which would set the standard for granting bail
extremely high. There is no consideration of whether such a high
standard is appropriate when personal liberty is at stake and when the
suspect is presumed innocent, especially when other factors such as the
strength of evidence against him are to be excluded in the first stage. The
absurdity of the two-stage test is best reflected in the Lai Chee Ying case
76                                     《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



itself: bail could be denied even when the prosecution case rests on a
                                74
flimsy evidential basis.             The Court of Final Appeal’s approach
encourages arbitrary arrest and prosecution of an NSL offence, which
would create a strong chilling effect irrespective whether the charge
would eventually be substantiated. While the Court of Final Appeal has
accepted the bail conditions could be taken into account in assessing the
risk of the defendant committing national security offences whilst on
bail, it does not appear in any subsequent cases that bail conditions are
able to tilt the balance.
                                            75
      In HKSAR v. Tam Tak Chi,                   the defendant was charged with
seditious uttering under the Crimes Ordinance (Cap. 200) for chanting
slogans and distributing leaflets on the street. This charge was laid
apparently after the police was advised that there was no case under the
      76
NSL.       Nonetheless, the prosecution asked for a designated judge to
handle the case on the ground that the charge was in the nature of
national security and the court applied the same bail principle under the
NSL to deny bail. It is difficult to see why a provision in the NSL could
be transported to a criminal offence under another Ordinance without
any clear statutory indication. The decision seems to be a clear violation


74 The case was remitted to another judge for consideration. Just the day before the
   rehearing of the bail application, the prosecution preferred a further charge against Lai
   Chee Ying to ensure that he would not get bail. Bail was denied by Anthea Pang Po-
   kam (as she then was): HKSAR v. Lai Chee Ying, HCCP 738/2020 (C.F.I. Feb. 23,
   2021) (Legal Reference System) (H.K.).
75 Hui, supra note 23.
76 See Helen Davidson, Hong Kong Activist Denied Bail after being Charged with
   Sedition, THE GUARDIAN (Sept. 17, 2020), https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/
   sep/17/hong-kong-activist-denied-bail-after-being-charge-with-sedition-tam-tak-chi;
   See also the news report by Hong Kong International Business Channel, Activist Tam
   Tak-chi Still Might be Charged with National Security law, FACEBOOK (Dec. 3, 2020),
   https://www.facebook.com/hkibcnews/posts/1267092566999784.
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                              77


                                77
of the principle of legality,        and the court seems to be too ready to go
along with the prosecution.

      Another noticeable case is the arrest of about 50 activists and former
politicians for participation in a primary election in preparation of the
election to the Legislative Council scheduled for September 2021, which
was subsequently postponed for a year. The organizer aimed at winning
a majority in the Legislature and proposed, if elected, to veto major
Government bills and the budget to pressurize the Government to speed
up the democratic process. Participants in the primary election did not
have to agree with that aim. Eventually 46 of them were charged with
                                                                        78
the offence of secession and only a few were granted bail.                   The arrest
and prosecution were widely perceived to be a major crackdown on the
opposition. At the time of writing, the defendants have been detained for
over 10 months, and the trial is expected to take place not before 2023.

B. Loss of the Right to Jury
      Back to the Tong Ying Kit case, the Secretary for Justice applied for
a dispensation of the jury trial allegedly on the ground of protection of


77 A v. The Commissioner of the Independent Commission Against Corruption, (2012)
   15 H.K.C.F.A.R. 362 (C.F.A.), paras. 68-69. (fundamental rights are not presumed to
   be taken away or restricted in the absence of clear wording or necessary implication).
   See also Regina v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte Simms [2000]
   2 AC 115, 131, per Lord Hoffmann.
78 One of the organizers, Benny Tai, was already in jail for organizing Occupy Central in
   2014. The accused included many well-known activities in the pan-democratic camp.
   Some were denied bail on the most flimsy basis. For example, Tam, a former
   legislator, was invited to meet with members of a foreign consulate. He did not reply
   to the invitation and was prepared to undertake not to meet with any foreign
   government officials whilst on bail. The court held that the invitation meant that he
   would be able to commit an offence of collusion with foreign government and bail
   was denied. The bail application of 46 accused lasted for 4 days, during which most
   accused were denied food and adequate rest.
78                                     《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）


                                                                                 79
jurors and their family members under article 46 of the NSL                           In an
earlier case, given that jury trial is only available at the High Court and
that it is for the Secretary for Justice to determine the venue of trials, the
Court of Final Appeal held that there was no right to jury trial in Hong
       80
Kong.       In the Tong case, the defendant argued that once the Secretary
for Justice has decided to proceed by way of indictment which has to be
heard at the High Court, there was a right to jury trial. This was rejected
                                                              81
by the Court of First Instance on two grounds.                     First, the defendant
could not waive the right to jury trial at the High Court, and there could
not be a right that could not be waived. Secondly, the Court has a power
to remit the case back to the District Court, where there is no jury. Hence
there could not be a right to jury trial if it could be defeated by
transferring the case to the District Court. Neither ground is convincing.
One may not waive the right to be killed or the right not to be tortured. It
does not follow that he has no right to life or no right not to be tortured.
Likewise, the mere fact that a right could be limited, especially when
this is done by the court after hearing the parties, does not mean that the
right does not exist. Most rights could be restricted. Nonetheless, the
                                          82
judgment was upheld on appeal.                 Despite the wealth of common law
authorities that described the immense value and unique features of jury
trial, the Court of Appeal downgraded jury trial to merely a mode of
criminal trial that is subject to prosecutorial discretion. What is more
worrying is that the Court treated the NSL as a law of constitutional



79 NSL art. 46 allows the Secretary for Justice to issue a certificate to direct a trial
   without jury on the ground of, inter alia, protection of national secrets, involvement of
   foreign factors, and protection of jurors and their family members.
80 Chiang Lily v. Secretary for Justice, (2010) 13 H.K.C.F.A.R. 208 (C.F.A.).
81 Tong Ying Kit v. Secretary for Justice, [2021] 2 H.K.L.R.D. 1036 (C.F.I.).
82 Tong Ying Kit v. Secretary for Justice, [2021] 3 H.K.L.R.D. 350 (C.A.).
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                                79


                                                                                  83
status and adopted a broad and purposive approach of construction.                     It
is well established that this approach is most apt for construing
constitutional rights. By a twist of logic, the Court of Appeal adopted
this approach in interpreting, not rights, but restrictions of rights.

         The loss of the right to jury trial is of particular significance in this
case. The main issue in this case is the meaning of a slogan, which forms
the basis of a charge of incitement of others to commit secession. This is
an issue that is particularly suitable for jury trial. The Court of Appeal
emphasized that the defendant’s right to fair trial has not been hampered
as he could not argue that he could not have a fair trial under the
                                            84
alternative of a trial by three judges.          This argument missed the point.
Jury trial is not just to ensure a fair trial, but more importantly, it is to
instill a sense of public judgment of what is right and wrong in the
criminal justice system, which is of particular significance in a political
trial.

C. A verbal offence to commit another verbal offence
         The trial of Tong Ying Kit took place in June 2021 before a panel of
                                                   85
three judges at the Court of First Instance.            The facts were largely not
in dispute. On 1 July 2020, the defendant rode his motorcycle with a
backpack from which a black flag containing a slogan of “Liberate Hong
Kong; Revolution of our Times” was hoisted upward and publicly
displayed while he drove the motorcycle. He ignored police’s attempts to
stop him and eventually injured three policemen. He was charged with


83 Id. at paras. 34-36.
84 Id. at para. 28.
85 HKSAR v. Tong Ying Kit, [2021] 3 H.K.L.R.D. 87 (C.F.I.). I am grateful to Professor
   Carole Petersen for sharing with me her draft article on Hong Kong’s First Conviction
   for Incitement to Secession: Is the ICCPR Still a Guide to Statutory Interpretation?.
80                               《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



two NSL offences of incitement of others with a view to committing
secession and carrying out terrorist activities, with an alternative charge
of causing grievous bodily harm by dangerous driving.

     The argument focused on the meaning of the slogan “Liberate Hong
Kong; Revolution of Our Times”. Both sides adduced expert evidence.
The prosecution expert, a history professor, testified from a historical
perspective that the phrase carried a secessionist meaning. This
interpretation was disputed by two experts on the defence side, a
political scientist and a professor in journalism. Their evidence is that the
slogan has to be interpreted in context and carried a multitude of
meanings. Different persons may interpret and understand the slogan
differently. Without resolving the dispute, the Court held that the slogan
was at least capable of carrying a secessionist meaning, and that was
sufficient for the offence of an incitement to secession. It also held that
the defendant, by choosing to carry out the act on a date of political
significance, clearly intended to carry out the act to intimidate the public
with a view to pursuing a political agenda. He was convicted of both
NSL offences and was sentenced to 9 years’ imprisonment.

     A surprising feature of the judgment is that it made no reference at
all to the constitutional right to freedom of expression. Given that the
offence could be committed without the use or the threat of use of force,
an offence of incitement to secession is essentially a verbal offence
leading to a verbal offence. Such kind of offence should call for the most
stringent scrutiny of the court, but no such scrutiny was undertaken by
the court. An incitement offence requires the proof that the incitement is
to incite someone to do a criminal offence, with the intention that if the
other person does as the defendant asks he will commit a criminal
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                          81


           86
offence.        The court applied the common law of incitement and held
that it was sufficient for the offence of incitement if the inciting act or
word was “capable of referring to a criminal offence.” It relied on a few
English and New Zealand cases, which were related to the offence of
murder, procuring unlawful sexual intercourse, and assaulting a police
        87
officer.        These were relatively well-defined offences in the common
law system. It was reasonably clear in these cases what the inciting
messages were and what the incitee was asked to do that would
constitute an offence. In contrast, the offence of secession is ill-defined
and unknown to the common law system. In the present case, the only
evidence in support of the offence of secession is a slogan that could
carry a variety of meanings, and the act of incitement was nothing more
than displaying the slogan while he was driving in public. It is unclear
what the message was that constituted the incitement, or what the
incitees were asked to do that was said to constitute the offence of
secession. The audience of the incitement is the ordinary member of the
public. If the meaning of the slogan can only be ascertained by an expert,
how could it incite anyone who is not an expert? And if the experts could
not agree among themselves of the meaning, is there not a reasonable
doubt that it would be able to incite the public? And what is the public
incited to do? The court has asked the wrong question. The right
question is not just whether the slogan is capable of carrying a
secessionist meaning, but also whether it can be proved beyond
reasonable doubt that if an audience understands the incitement and

86 DPP v. Armstrong, [1999] EWHC (QB) 270; HKSAR v. Tai Yiu Ting and others,
   DCCC480/2017 (D.C. Apr. 9, 2019) (Legal Reference System) (H.K.), para. 75.
87 HKSAR v. Tong Ying Kit, [2021] 3 H.K.L.R.D. 87 (C.F.I.), paras. 17-34. The cases
   were respectively R v. Most (1881) 7 QBD 244; R. v. M. [2014] EWCA (Crim) 2823;
   Invicta Plastics Ltd v. Clare [1976] RTR 251; R v. Goldman [2001] EWCA (Crim)
   1684; and Young v. Cassells (1914) 33 NZLR 852.
82                                《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



carries out the act as incited it will amount to an offence of secession.
There was no evidence of how the incited act was to be carried out.
Indeed, there are many different ways of receiving the meaning of the
slogan, and even if the audience adopts the secessionist meaning, there
are still many different ways of carrying it out, not every way will
necessarily amount to a secession act. Without such evidence, there is
nothing more than a mere possibility — a possibility that the audience
will understand the vague meaning and adopt one of the meanings that is
“capable of carrying a secessionist meaning” and then the possibility of
carrying out the secessionist meaning in a way that is unlawful. It could
hardly be shown that such a standard would be able to satisfy the
proportionate requirement for restricting a constitutional right to
freedom of expression.

       The reasoning is equally weak in relation to the terrorist offence.
There is no question that the act amounted to causing serious harm to
others by dangerous driving, which the court found unnecessary to deal
with. There was little evidence that the act was carried out to intimidate
the public. The only evidence in this regard was a driver in a vehicle
who witnessed the Defendant’s motorcycle crashed into some police
officers. Any reasonable person would be frightened in such
circumstances, but the fear has nothing to do with the political nature of
the act. There was also little evidence that the act caused grave harm to
society. The court took the view that a serious challenge to the police
would “instill a sense of fear amongst the law-abiding members of the
society” that there would be a breakdown of law and order, and thereby
                                                          88
“grave harm would certainly be caused to society”.             This is a rather


88 HKSAR v. Tong Ying Kit, HCCC 280/2020 (C.F.I. July 27, 2021) (Legal Reference
     System) (H.K.), para. 162.
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                   83


tenuous argument, as any notorious crime or any attack at the police
could be said to have this effect but certainly not all such criminal
offences could be regarded as a terrorist act. For a terrorist offence, it
would be reasonable to require the harm to society to reach a certain
degree of severity and the criminal act to aim at causing harm to at least
a considerable segment of society rather than an act of reckless driving
causing serious harm to a few police officers. The court also adopted a
rather loose meaning of political agenda. Despite the ambiguous
meaning of the slogan, the court held that a meaning to recover what was
lost and the need for a fundamental change in Hong Kong could equally
                                   89
amount to a political agenda.           While such acts could loosely be
regarded as political in nature, it is highly doubtful that they could be
considered a political agenda for a terrorist offence that could carry a
maximum sentence of life imprisonment. Such an offence certainly
requires a much more precise and narrower definition, or otherwise any
advocacy for reform could run the risk of being a terrorist act if it results
in a confrontation with the police. Finally, what exactly is the political
agenda, which has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt? Expert
evidence was divided on the meaning of the slogan, and this weakness
could hardly be remedied by the political significance of the chosen date
for the display or the fact that he drove along the road a few times with a
view to displaying the slogan.

     Tong Ying Kit was followed in HKSAR v. Ma Chun Man, the second
                       90
national security case.     The defendant was charged with the offence of
inciting others to commit secession under article 21 of the NSL. Unlike


89 Id. at para. 165.
90 HKSAR v. Ma Chun Man, DCCC 122/2021 (D.C. Oct. 25, 2021) (Legal Reference
   System) (H.K.).
84                                《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



Tong Ying Kit, Ma’s case involved no violence. He was found to be
expressing a sincere and heartfelt expression of his beliefs and feelings
on multiple occasions. He relied on his freedom of expression, which
was rejected by the court on the ground that he clearly ignored the major
principle in article 1 of the Basic Law, namely that Hong Kong is an
inalienable part of the PRC. This is a disappointingly crude analysis.
There is no analysis of the proportionality requirement for a restriction
on the constitutional right of freedom of expression. Article 1 of the
Basic Law by itself does not prohibit any ideology or political belief.
The inalienability or integrity of the nation is to be protected by, inter
alia, the offence of secession. If the defendant has taken no action to
implement his political belief, and has not advocated any action, it is
difficult to see what he was inciting others to do. The court stated that
                                                       91
the effect of incitement could be imperceptible,            but that did not
provide an answer to whether preaching his political belief alone, or
more accurately, chanting some vague slogans without more, would
have the effect of breaking up the country and whether such prohibition
would be a proportionate restriction of the right to freedom of expression.
While the defendant is not charged with the offence of secession, there
has to be some causal link between the incitement and the offence of
secession, for otherwise the incitement offence would become a stand
alone prohibition on thoughts and beliefs that is characteristic of a
totalitarian regime. By failing to consider such causal link, the court is
effectively punishing the defendant for holding and expressing his
political belief. While the court may not be able to strike down such an
         92
offence,      it is at least within the court’s jurisdiction, if not also the


91 Id. at para. 77.
92 See infra Section VI.
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                             85


court’s duty, to read down the scope of such sweeping offence.



V. Other Legal, Political and Social Impact of the NSL

     Since the NSL came into effect, there has been a hardening of
judicial approach towards public order offences. Protesters involved in
the social unrest in 2019 were charged with various public order
offences and were met with heavy custodial sentences upon
              93
conviction.         This is so even when the public demonstration was
                                                          94
entirely peaceful. In HKSAR v. Lai Chee Ying,                  the defendants were
convicted of two offences of participating and organizing an
unauthorized assembly. It was not in dispute that the demonstration
lasted for only a few hours and was entirely peaceful. The only evidence
on organizing an unauthorized assembly was that the defendants agreed
to hold the banner at the front of the procession which they knew was
                   95
unauthorized.           The court rejected the defendants’ submission that the
offence was a disproportionate restriction on the right to peaceful
assembly when the procession was entirely peaceful and no violence
broke out. They were given a range of custodial sentence between 6 and
18 months, with 3 defendants given a suspended sentence of 2 years.
The conviction did not sit well with the well-established jurisprudence

93 For example, 5 ex-Chinese University students were given almost 5 years’
   imprisonment for the confrontation on the University campus in Nov 2019: Selina
   Cheng, 5 Hong Kong Ex-Students Sentenced to Nearly 5 Years’ Jail for Rioting during
   2019 Campus Clashes, HONG KONG FREE PRESS (Oct. 19, 2021), https://hongkongfp.
   com/2021/10/19/5-hong-kong-ex-students-sentenced-to-nearly-5-years-jail-for-rioting-
   during-2019-campus-clashes/.
94 HKSAR v. Lai Chee Ying and others, DCCC 536/2020 (D.C. Apr. 1, 2021) (Legal
   Reference System) (H.K.).
95 Id. at paras. 179-82.
86                                    《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



that a peaceful demonstration should not, in principle, be subject to the
                                                                                      96
threat of a criminal sanction, and notably the deprivation of liberty.
The mere fact that an assembly was not authorized by the police did not
take away the defendants’ right to peaceful assembly.

      On the political front, 4 pan-democrat legislators were first
disqualified from participating in the then scheduled election of
Legislative Council in September 2020 for opposing the NSL, and then
disqualified from continuing to serve as members of the extended
Legislative Council when the election was postponed. This triggered an
en masse resignation of another 15 legislators from the pan-democrat
front, resulting in a Legislative Council virtually without any
              97
opposition.        In 2021, the Government substantially overhauled the
election process. Under the “improved system”, the number of directly
                                                                                      98
elected seats was reduced to 20 out of 90 (as opposed to 35 out of 70).
A new Election Committee was established which will return 40
              99
candidates.        This Committee is also responsible for nomination of
              100
candidates.         The composition of the Election Committee and

96 See, for example, Kudrevičius v. Lithuania, App. No. 37553/05, 62 Eur. H.R. Rep. 34
   (2016), para. 146; Gül v. Turkey, App. No. 4870/02, 52 Eur. H.R. Rep. 38 (2011), para.
   43; and HKSAR v. Chow Nok Hang, (2013) 16 H.K.C.F.A.R. 837 (C.F.A), para. 43.
97 Cliff Buddle, Loss of an Opposition in Hong Kong’s Legislative Council is a Tragedy
   for the City, SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST (Nov. 18, 2020), https://www.scmp.com/
   comment/opinion/article/3110170/loss-opposition-hong-kongs-legislative-council-
   tragedy-city; Hong Kong: Entire Opposition Quits Legislative Council after 4 Pro-
   Democracy Lawmakers Expelled, DW (Nov. 11, 2020), https://www.dw.com/en/
   hong-kong-entire-opposition-quits-legislative-council-after-4-pro-democracy-lawm
   akers-expelled/a-55559840.
98 Legislative Council Ordinance, (2021) Cap. 542, § 19 (H.K.).
99 Id. § 21B.
100 Each candidate requires the nomination of 2-4 members of the Election Committee
    from each of its 5 sectors: HONG KONG SPECIAL ADMINISTRATIVE REGION IMPROVE
    ELECTORAL SYSTEM, https://www.cmab.gov.hk/improvement/en/legco-ele/index.html
    (last visited Oct. 27, 2021)
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                                87


functional constituencies is redefined to minimize the opportunities of
the opposition to get elected. All candidates running for election would
be subject to a political screening process to ensure that only patriots
                              101
could stand for election.           The result of the reform is that there would
be no significant presence of any opposition, if any at all, at the
Legislative Council. At the District Board level, the requirement of all
District Board members to take an oath of allegiance and the threat that
any member who were disqualified for breach of the oath would be
required to repay a substantial sum of over HK$1 Million representing
their renumeration and allowances resulted in a large number of
resignation of pan-democrat members. By the time the oath requirement
came into force, over 230 out of a total of 452 directly elected District
                                         102
Council members had resigned;                  as a result, more than 11 District
                              103
Councils were paralysed.

      On the civil/social side, within a year of the NSL coming into effect,
                                                                            104
civic rights organizations, human rights organizations,                           media


101 Legislative Council Ordinance, (2021) Cap. 542, § 42A (H.K.). A Candidate
    Eligibility Review Committee is set up under § 9A of the Chief Executive Election
    Ordinance (Cap. 569) and its decision on the eligibility of a candidate for the
    Legislative Council election is not subject to judicial challenge: Legislative Council
    Ordinance, (2021) Cap. 542, § 3B (H.K.).
102 Jeffie Lam, Hong Kong’s District Councils: With Opposition Members Resigning in
    Droves as Oath Looms, What Happens Next to These Local Bodies?, SOUTH CHINA
    MORNING POST (July 16, 2021), https://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/politics/
    article/3141388/why-are-hong-kongs-district-councillors-resigning-droves.
103 At Least 11 District Councils Paralyzed after Resignations, THE STANDARD (Sept. 6,
    2021), https://www.thestandard.com.hk/breaking-news/section/4/179924/At-least-11-
    district-councils-paralyzed-after-resignations.
104 Amnesty International is the latest human rights organisation to join the list: Helen
    Davidson, Amnesty International to Close Hong Kong Offices due to National
    Security Law, THE GUARDIAN (Oct. 25, 2021), https://www.theguardian.com/world/
    2021/oct/25/amnesty-international-to-close-hong-kong-offices-due-to-national-secur
    ity-law.
88                                    《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



organizations, professional teachers’ unions, labour trade unions,
university’s students’ unions were dissolved or relocated elsewhere one
                 105
after the other.       The Hong Kong’s Alliance for the Support of Patriotic
Democratic Movements in China, the organization responsible for
organizing the annual candlelight vigil in Victoria Park in the last three
decades in commemoration of the Tiananmen event in 1989, was
investigated for alleged collusion with foreign forces. The Alliance
decided to disband itself, and within days, all of its assets were frozen by
                              106
national security police.           The annual candlelight vigil stands as a
symbol of political freedom in Hong Kong and attracts tens of thousands
of participants each year. This peaceful event was banned for two
successive years in 2020 and 2011, allegedly on ground of pandemic
control, despite that Hong Kong has an extremely low infection rate by
June 2021. Many award-winning current affairs programmes on RTHK,
the public broadcaster, were removed or discontinued after a new
Director was appointed by the Government. Massive arrest of people
suspected of committing NSL offences and the lengthy pre-trial
detention have effectively silenced the critics. Even everyday life is
affected. Hong Kong Marathon runners were not allowed to bear tattoos
                                            107
or political slogans in their apparel.            By September 2021, more than


105 See Toru Kurata, Hong Kong’s National Security Law: An Attack on Civil Society,
     NIPPON.COM (Sept. 22, 2021), https://www.nippon.com/en/in-depth/d00746/.
106 Cannix Yau & Jasmine Siu, National Security Police Freeze All Assets of Hong Kong
    Group behind Annual Tiananmen Vigil, SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST (Sept. 29,
    2021), https://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/politics/article/3150594/national-
    security-police-freeze-all-assets-hong-kong-group; Hong Kong June 4 Vigil Organizers
    to Disband Amid Crackdown, AP NEWS (Sept. 25, 2021), https://apnews.com/article/
    china-hong-kong-political-activism-democracy-83054fecd10f66751d688403f8cc75d0.
107 Helen Davidson, Hong Kong Police Tell Marathon Runners to Cover up ‘Political’
    Clothing and Tattoos, THE GUARDIAN (Oct. 25, 2021), https://www.theguardian.com/
    world/2021/oct/25/hong-kong-police-tell-marathon-runners-to-cover-up-political-
    clothing-and-tattoos. The “political” slogans include “Hong Kong Add Oil”, a slogan
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                            89


65,000 Hongkongers have applied to live in the United Kingdom under
its new visa scheme that was opened for application on 31 January 2021.



VI. Conclusion

     The NSL has been in force in Hong Kong for just over a year. Yet it
has changed Hong Kong dramatically. Those who support the NSL say
that it is effective in restoring law and order, and that the Central
Government has already been quite restrained in enforcing the NSL.
They pointed out that the inclusion of articles 4 and 5 on the protection
of fundamental rights is unusual in Mainland legislation and represents a
compromise between protecting national security and consideration of
the special situation of the HKSAR. The Central Government introduced
the NSL only as a last resort when the HKSAR has failed to discharge its
constitutional duty under article 23 of the Basic Law to enact national
security legislation.

     It has been argued that the justification for introducing the NSL
could not withstand scrutiny. Even if the HKSAR had failed in its
constitutional duty, there is no justification why the NSL has to go
beyond article 23 of the Basic Law by establishing Mainland
enforcement agencies and personnel in the HKSAR and by providing for
power to remove a suspect from the jurisdiction of the HKSAR under
article 56 of the NSL. These provisions only make sense when the NSL
is understood to be a means to enable the Central Government to
exercise full control over the governance in the HKSAR. That is, it


    that has been chanted on many sports occasions, presumably because this slogan has
    been used by the protesters during the social unrest in the last two years.
90                               《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



represents a step to claw back the extent of autonomy of the HKSAR
granted under the Basic Law. This is further reinforced by the recent
overhaul of the election process. Only patriots would be allowed to stand
for election to the Legislative Council. The purposes of the NSL are not
just to plug the legal loopholes to protect national security. It is also to
implement the Mainland’s policy of exercising full jurisdiction over
Hong Kong as well as weakening the judiciary, as judicial independence
is the only remaining hurdle to the achievement of full jurisdiction over
the HKSAR.

     The NSL provides an inroad to many fundamental rights, and while
it is still too early to make any definite conclusion, the record of the
judiciary so far in protecting fundamental rights is less than impressive.
Articles 4 and 5 of the NSL are effectively a dead letter. The Court of
Final Appeal has not explained how the reversal of the presumption of
bail could sit consistently with the protection of fundamental rights
under these provisions. The Court of Appeal paid lip service to them in
downgrading the right to jury trial to nothing more than a mode of trial
that is to be determined by the Secretary for Justice, whose decision
could not be challenged short of showing bad faith. The Court of First
Instance simply ignored these fundamental rights in convicting the
defendant for national security offences in Tong Ying Kit, whereas the
District Court made only a passing remark to these provisions in Ma
Chun Man.

     What options do the court have?

     An obvious option is to challenge the constitutionality of the
sweeping offenses in the NSL. It has been argued that this option is
precluded by the general duty of the judiciary to enforce the NSL
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                          91


effectively. This argument apart, these offenses, if challenged, would
most likely be held to be constitutional. Firstly, under article 62 of the
NSL, the NSL prevails over any local law of the HKSAR, including the
Bill of Rights. Secondly, while the reference to “local law” in article 62
may not include the Basic Law, this is likely to be a moot point. Leaving
aside whether the Basic Law would prevail over the NSL, any argument
based on the Basic Law is unlikely to go beyond the argument whether
the NSL offenses are consistent with articles 4 and 5 of the NSL. The co-
existence of these two articles and the NSL offenses in the same law by
itself precludes any argument that the sweeping national security
offenses would be inconsistent with the human rights provisions in the
NSL. The constitutionality of the NSL is fait accompli.

     Hence, the more realistic option is that the courts could read down
the sweeping national security offenses to ensure their consistency with
                               108
articles 4 and 5 of the NSL.         In this regard, there are potentially plenty
of rooms for Hong Kong judges to mitigate the draconian nature of the
national security offenses. The decision of the Divisional Bench in Tong
Ying Kit is encouraging, as it exemplifies the attempt of the judiciary to
bring the NSL provision on bail in line with the common law principles.
It is also open to the court to adopt the common law principles to
interpret the NSL. These principles may include a strict approach to
interpreting penal provisions, the requirement of mens rea and a
presumption against strict liability offenses; the legality principle that
Parliament is not presumed to restrict liberty and freedoms without the


108 See, for example, Surya Deva, Putting Byrnes and Hong Kong in a Time Machine:
    Human Rights in 2021 under the Shadow of Beijing’s National Security Law, 27(3)
    AUSTL. J. HUM. RTS. 467(2021); Po Jen Yap, Judging Hong Kong’s National Security
    Law, in HONG KONG’S NATIONAL SECURITY LAW: RESTORATION AND TRANSFORMATION
    (Hualing Fu & Michael Hor eds., forthcoming 2022).
92                                   《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）


                     109
clearest language,         and the well-known principle of proportionality.
There are also rooms for judicial creativity on procedural or evidential
matters. It is open to the court to require a reasonable degree of
proximity or a causal link between an act and the object of substantive
national security offences such as secession or subversion. In particular,
the courts enjoy considerable latitude in the finding of facts and drawing
of inferences. The burden and the standard of proof in criminal trials
would likely prove to be of particular significance, especially when the
evidence is flimsy.

     However, this approach suffers from a few constraints. First, an
obvious constraint is the language of the text. The court could not adopt
                                                           110
an interpretation that the language could not bear.               Thus, the court in
HKSAR v. Ma Chun Man found it impossible to read down the clear
                                                              111
words of “whether or not by force or threat of force.”              The corollary is
that it would require a great deal of imagination and creativity on the part
of the judiciary to adopt a responsive approach of interpretation. Secondly,
in adopting a purposive approach, the court may be constrained by the
purpose of the NSL, which was explained by the NPCSC in the broadest
sense to suggest that mere advocacy for Hong Kong independence is
                                                            112
sufficient to constitute a threat to national security.           The cautious and


109 Regina v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte Simms, [2000] 2 AC
    115, 131; A v. Commissioner of ICAC, (2012) 15 H.K.C.F.A.R. 362 (C.F.A.), paras.
    68-69; R (Unison) v. Lord Chancellor [2017] 3 WLR 409 at para 65, 68.
110 Comilang Milagros Tecson and another v. Director of Immigration, [2018] 2
    H.K.L.R.D. 534 (C.F.A), paras. 66-67; Director of Immigration v. Chong Fung Yuen,
    (2001) 4 H.K.C.F.A.R. 211, 223-25 (C.F.A).
111 HKSAR v. Ma Chun Man, HCCP 711/2020 (C.F.I. Dec. 29, 2020) (Legal Reference
    System) (H.K.) (bail application). The Court in Tong Ying Kit found this to be
    obvious: HKSAR v. Tong Ying Kit, HCCC 280/2020 (C.F.I. July 27, 2021) (Legal
    Reference System) (H.K.), para. 11.
112 “The [Third Session of the Thirteenth NPC] considered that the risks for national
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                                 93


deferential approach to interpretation adopted in HKSAR v. Ma Chun
Man, including its ready acceptance of the broad purpose of the NSL,
does not inspire confidence that the court would adopt a highly
imaginative or critical approach to interpretation of the NSL.

      Thirdly, the NSL is the result of decades of ideological conflicts
between the two systems. The NSL represents a shift to a more
interventionist Central Government and a determined attempt to curb the
powers of the judiciary. It is unlikely that the Central Government would
allow the Hong Kong courts a free rein to interpret or apply the NSL. An
NPCSC interpretation to pre-empt or reverse a judgment of the court is
not a remote possibility. Indeed, the purpose of article 62 of the NSL on
the power of final interpretation of the NSL is to ensure that the Hong
Kong courts would not go beyond what is acceptable to the Central
Government. The tide has changed.
                                                                   113
      In this regard, the courts are rather exposed.                     It has been a
convention in the common law system for the Secretary for Justice to


    security in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR) have become
    notable in recent years. Various unlawful activities such as advocacy for ‘Hong Kong
    independence’ as well as acts of secession, violence and terrorism, etc have seriously
    jeopardised national sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity. Certain foreign or
    external forces have flagrantly interfered in Hong Kong’s affairs and utilised Hong
    Kong to carry out activities endangering national security.” Hence the NSL was
    introduced “to safeguard national sovereignty, security and development interests,
    uphold and improve the ‘one country, two systems’ regime, safeguard the long-term
    prosperity and stability of Hong Kong, and safeguard the legitimate rights and
    interests of Hong Kong residents.” See Decision of the NPC on Establishing and
    Improving the Legal System and Enforcement Mechanisms for the HKSAR to
    Safeguard National Security, Hong Kong Constitutional Instrument A215 (May 28,
    2020).
113 As Chief Justice Geoffrey Ma observed at his retirement speech, the judiciary has
    been subject to intense attacks and scurrilous abuses in recent years: Farewell Sitting
    for the Honourable Mr Justice Geoffrey Ma CJ, (2021) 24 H.K.C.F.A.R. 1.
94                                    《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



defend the judiciary, as it is inappropriate for the judiciary to engage in
any public debates. Yet in the last few years, the Secretary for Justice has
to be reminded of her duties on a number of occasions. In November
2020, the NPCSC disqualified four opposition legislators. This led to the
en masse resignation of all pan-democrat legislators in protest. Thus, as
from November 2020, the Legislative Council became essentially a
compliant body with no opposition. The enhanced election process is
designed to ensure a compliant Legislature. Without the support and
protection of both the Legislature and the Executive Government, the
                                                  114
judiciary becomes particularly vulnerable.

      Fourthly, there are signs that the courts, and notably the Court of
Final Appeal, have become increasingly deferential. Space constraint
                                                                                    115
does not allow a full exposition of this fascinating topic of deference.
In applying the NSL, the core question at the end of the day is how far
the courts are prepared to accept inroads to fundamental rights and
freedoms for the protection of national security. This is a question of
proportionality, which is ultimately a value judgment. Studies elsewhere
have shown that since the adoption of the Hysan test, the courts have
                                     116
tended to be more deferential.             In the oath case, the Court of Appeal
could have affirmed the decision of the lower court to disqualify the two



114 Michael C. Davis as quoted by Hui, supra note 23.
115 See, for example, Cora Chan, Rights, Proportionality and Deference: A Study of Post-
    Handover Judgments in Hong Kong, 48 HKLJ 51 (2018); Rehan Abeyratne, More
    Structure, More Deference?: Proportionality in Hong Kong, in PROPORTIONALITY IN
    ASIA 25 (Po Jen Yap ed., 2020); Johannes M.M. Chan, Proportionality after Hysan:
    Fair Balance, Manifestly Without Reasonable Foundation, and Wednesbury
    Unreasonableness, 49 HKLJ 265 (2019) [hereinafter Chan, Proportionality].
116 See Abeyratne, supra note 115; Alec Stone-Sweet, The Necessity of Balancing:
    Hong Kong’s Flawed Approach to Proportionality, and Why it Matters, 50 HKLJ
    541 (2020); Chan, Proportionality, supra note 115.
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                                 95


legislators under local law without reliance on the controversial
interpretation of the NPCSC, but it chose to embrace fully the NPCSC
interpretation which was made after the event. This reasoning gave rise
to an important issue of retrospective effect of the NPCSC interpretation
and its impact on existing judicial proceedings, but the Court of Final
Appeal refused to grant leave on the nebulous ground that retrospectivity
                                                         117
of the NPCSC interpretation was well settled.                  In the colocation case,
the court readily accepted that an NPCSC decision could provide the
legal basis for introducing wholesale the law of the Mainland to the
HKSAR without compliance with the requirements of the Basic Law,
and accepted that any attempt to challenge the decision would be
       118
futile.      In December 2020, the Court of Final Appeal held that both
the Emergency Regulation Ordinance and the Regulation were
                  119
constitutional.         Regarding the former, the Court was prepared to
uphold the almost unlimited legislative power of the Chief Executive in
Council in the undefined circumstances of public danger, and was
satisfied with the unrealistic safeguards that the decision to invoke this
                                             120
power is subject to judicial review.               Regarding the latter, the Court
upheld the Regulation prohibiting the wearing of facial covering in
peaceful public assemblies on the ground that preventive action was
necessary to prevent these public assemblies from becoming violent. Its


117 See Chan, supra note 2.
118 Kwok Cheuk Kin v. Secretary for Justice [2019] 1 H.K.L.R.D. 292 (C.F.I.); decision
    affirmed on appeal: [2021] 3 H.K.L.R.D. 140 (C.A.)
119 Kwok Wing Hang v. Chief Executive in Council, (2020) 23 H.K.C.F.A.R. 518
    (C.F.A.).
120 The Chief Executive in Council is under no duty to provide reasons for declaring an
    emergency, let alone the vague notion of public danger. An attempt to seek discovery
    of the discussion at the Executive Council will be strenuously resisted on the ground
    of public interest immunity. Nor is there any realistic ground to challenge the failure
    to bring an emergency to an end.
96                                   《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



decision to uphold the prohibition of face masks when practically
everyone in the community has been wearing health masks as a result of
the pandemic for almost a year is so divorced from reality that it would
hardly command public respect. The decisions of various courts to refuse
bail in national security cases when the facts of those cases involved no
more than peaceful advocacy could hardly inspire confidence. Within a
year of the entry into force of the NSL, the courts have given up the
presumption of bail, the right to jury trial, and adopted a low standard of
scrutiny over verbal offences. The prosecution of Jimmy Lai is widely
perceived to be political persecution, yet the Court of Final Appeal did
not seem to demonstrate the sensitivity that is called for when personal
liberty is at stake.

      It was unfortunate that political pressure has continuously been
asserted on the judiciary. When Chow J held that the police were in
breach of the Bill of Rights by failing to show their identification whilst
          121                                                                     122
on duty,        Ta Kung Pao launched a virulent attack at the judge.
Attempts to put pressure on the Court of Final Appeal to revoke the bail
of Jimmy Lai were both intense and blatant. People’s Daily carried an
article suggesting that if bail were to be granted by the Court of Final
Appeal, it would have justified intervention under article 55 of the NSL
to take the matter out of the jurisdiction of the Hong Kong courts and
urged the Court of Final Appeal to “make the correct decision.” Ta Kung
Pao also carried an editorial suggesting that the High Court’s decision to


121 Hong Kong Journalists Association v. Commissioner of Police and another, [2021] 1
     H.K.L.R.D. 427 (C.F.I.).
122 Anita Yip, Letter of the Hong Kong Bar Association to the Secretary for Justice,
     HONG KONG BAR ASSOCIATION (Dec. 28, 2020), https://www.hkba.org/sites/default/
     files/Letter%20to%20Secretary%20for%20Justice%2028%20Dec%202020%20re%
     20Attack%20on%20Judges.pdf.
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                                                97


grant bail to Mr. Lai was not only contrary to the rule of law but had a
shadow of foreign interference behind it. These statements, which were
published shortly before the hearing before the Court of Final Appeal,
could be perceived by the public as putting pressure on the judiciary in
relation to extant legal proceedings and bordered on a contempt of
       123
court.       While it may be accepted that the Court of Final Appeal has
not been affected by these comments, its unconvincing decision to
revoke bail unfortunately reinforces the public perception that the court
has succumbed to such political pressure. The readiness of the court to
give up fundamental rights and to convict on tenuous grounds gives no
cause for comfort about judicial independence.

      Of course, in all these cases, it is easy to put the blame on the
draconian law and argued that there is no ground to believe that the court
is not discharging its duties independently. The problem is that the court
is too ready to give significant weight to national security or public order
and too deferential to the authority even regarding draconian measures.
It may be thought that the adoption of a deferential approach could spare
the attacks on the judiciary and hence allowing judicial independence in
other less sensitive areas. This is a self-defeating proposition, for
independence carved is independence lost. While judicial independence
and judicial deference are two different issues, the consequences may be
the same. One is about resistance to external pressure; the other is about
internalization of external pressure. The former is apparent and may be
temporary; the latter is subtle and long lasting, and arguably more
damaging in an authoritarian era, for it tends to provide intellectual


123 This led the Hong Kong Bar Association to appeal to the Secretary for Justice to take
    appropriate actions to uphold the rule of law: see id. No action has been taken by the
    Secretary for Justice.
98                              《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



rationalization for a repressive regime and renders the court part of the
repressive regime. The loss of public confidence in an independent
judiciary is equally, if not more damaging to the maintenance of judicial
independence.

     The NSL has brought to the forefront and deepened the long
existing ideological conflicts. In Hong Kong, judicial independence is
about the rule of law. For the Mainland, judicial independence is about
power and authority. What it wants is a compliant judiciary. Judicial
independence may still be tolerated, but only to the extent that it does
not interfere with what the Central Government regards as national
interest. In a system of the rule of law, the function of law is to protect
fundamental rights and freedoms of the governed. In a system of rule by
law, law becomes predominantly an instrument to govern and to
consolidate the power and position of the governing. So far, the NSL has
achieved remarkable success in wiping out the opposition, stifling the
dissenting views and destroying a civil society. It has turned what used
to be peaceful and lawful exercise of fundamental rights into criminal
offences, and the judiciary seems willing to condone such consequences.
Legislators, journalists, social workers, academics, and students are
rigorously pursued by the prosecution for what appears to be entirely
peaceful acts and have been put under lengthy pre-trial detention. Civic
rights groups, political parties, media organizations, teachers’ unions,
labour unions, and students’ unionss have either been disbanded or
simply collapsed one after the other. These developments shed light on
the Mainland’s conception of “One Country, Two Systems”. What it
envisages is a separate economic system that is run by chosen patriots
who would not challenge the authority of the Central Government or the
executive government of the HKSAR, and the system is to be supported
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                              99


by a compliant legislature, a deferential judiciary and an unquestioning
public. But when a civil society is destroyed, when the judiciary is
becoming increasingly compliant or deferential, and when people begin
to vote by their feet, what more is left of the two systems in the “One
Country, Two Systems constitutional model” except in name? Worse still,
vague law carries uncertainty; uncertainty allows arbitrary exercise of
power; arbitrary power instills fear; fear generates self-censorship. In
this regard, the NSL marks not only the beginning of the end of two
systems, but also the beginning of an authoritarian era.
100                              《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）




                             References

Abeyratne,      Rehan.   2020.   More   Structure,   More    Deference?:
      Proportionality in Hong Kong. Pp. 25-59 in Proportionality in Asia,
      edited by Po Jen Yap. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Chan, Cora. 2018. Rights, Proportionality and Deference: A Study of
      Post-Handover Judgments in Hong Kong. Hong Kong Law Journal
      48:51-78.
─. 2019. Demise of “One Country, Two Systems”? Reflections on
      the Hong Kong Rendition Sage. Hong Kong Law Journal 49:447-
      458.
Chan, Johannes M.M. 2019. A Shrinking Space: A Dynamic
      Relationship between the Judiciary in a Liberal Society of Hong
      Kong and the Socialist-Leninist Sovereign State. Current Legal
      Problems 72:85-122.
─. 2019. Proportionality after Hysan: Fair Balance, Manifestly
      Without      Reasonable      Foundation,       and     Wednesbury
      Unreasonableness. Hong Kong Law Journal 49:265-294.
─. 2019. Ten Days that Shock the World: The Rendition Proposal
      in Hong Kong. Hong Kong Law Journal 49:431-446.
─. 2020. Maintaining Institutional Strength: The Court, the Act of
      State and the Rule of Law. Pp. 251-274 in China’s National
      Security: Endangering Hong Kong’s Rule of Law?, edited by Cora
      Chan and Fiona de Londras. Chicago: Hart Publishing.
─. 2020. Reconciliation of the NPCSC’s Power of Interpretation of
      the Basic Law with the Common Law in the HKSAR. Hong Kong
      Law Journal 50:657-684.
─ . 2021. Judicial Responses to the National Security Law:
National Security Law 2020 in Hong Kong                               101


     HKSAR v Lai Chee Ying. Hong Kong Law Journal 50:1-14.
Chen, Albert H.Y. 2019. A Perfect Storm: Hong Kong-China Rendition
     of Fugitive Offenders, 2019. Hong Kong Law Journal 49:419-430.
Deva, Surya. 2021. Putting Byrnes and Hong Kong in a Time Machine:
     Human Rights in 2021 under the Shadow of Beijing’s National
     Security Law. Australian Journal of Human Rights 27(3):467-486.
Devlin, Patrick. 1956. Trial by Jury. London: Stevens and Sons.
Petersen, Carole. 2005. Hong Kong’s Spring of Discontent: The Rise
     and Fall of the National Security Bill in 2003. Pp. 13-62 in National
     Security and Fundamental Freedoms: Hong Kong’s Article 23
     under Scrutiny, edited by Hualing Fu, Carole J. Petersen and Simon
     N. M. Young. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
─. 2020. The Disappearing Firewall: International Consequences
     of Beijing’s Decision to Impose a National Security Law and
     Operate National Security Institutions in Hong Kong. Hong Kong
     Law Journal 50:633-656.
Stone-Sweet, Alec. 2020. The Necessity of Balancing: Hong Kong’s
     Flawed Approach to Proportionality, and Why it Matters. Hong
     Kong Law Journal 50:541-568.
Tai, Benny. 2019. Round Three of Hong Kong’s Constitutional Game:
     From Semi-Democracy to Semi-Authoritarianism. Hong Kong Law
     Journal 49:335-356.
Yap, Po Jen. Forthcoming 2022. Judging Hong Kong’s National Security
     Law. In Hong Kong’s National Security Law: Restoration and
     Transformation, edited by Hualing Fu and Michael Hor. Hong
     Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
