    Hong Kong’s Changing Rule of Law
Academia Sinica Law Journal                                                           21
2022 Special Issue, pp. 21-37 (May 2022)




         Beijing’s National Security Law
        and the Destruction of the Liberal
                                           ＊
       Constitutional Order in Hong Kong
                                                       ＊＊
                              Michael C. Davis


                                      Abstract
      Hong Kong people and their supporters across the globe have
watched in dismay as Beijing and Hong Kong officials gobble up the
city’s basic freedoms and rule of law. The city, once promised a liberal
constitutional order in the 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration and its
1990 Basic Law, is now to live under a repressive national security
constitution. The National Security Law (NSL) imposed in 2020 has
effectively become superior to the Basic Law and had been used to arrest
or bar the popular political opposition from the political process. This
occurred in two stages, first, with the arrests or push into exile of most of
the leading figures in the pan-democratic opposition, and second, with
the imposition of “democratic reform” with strict vetting to insure only
“patriots” can run for office. Leading opposition figures charged with


＊  This article is a revised and updated version of my testimony given in the U.S.
   Congress before the Lantos Human Rights Commission on October 14, 2021.
＊＊ Professor Michael C. Davis, a long-time professor in Hong Kong at both the Chinese
   University of Hong Kong and the University of Hong Kong, is currently a Global
   Fellow at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, a Professor of
   Law and International Affairs at O.P. Jindal Global University, and a Senior Research
   Scholar at the Weatherhead East Asian Institute at Columbia University. He is the
   author of the recent book, MAKING HONG KONG CHINA: THE ROLLBACK OF HUMAN
   RIGHTS AND THE RULE OF LAW, the Asia Society Series, Columbia University Press,
   2021.
   Online: http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/92114022.pdf.
22                               《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）


subversion or collusion risk being sent to prison for years. After being
arrested, they may linger in jail for months awaiting trial under an NSL
presumption against bail. A mainland Office for Safeguarding National
Security and a local Committee for Safeguarding National Security, as
well as a candidate review committee, are effectively above the law, not
subject to judicial review. Special branches of the police and the justice
department operate under their guidance and supervision. The courts
face intimidation, with only designated judges allowed to hear NSL cases.
Human rights-oriented community organizations have been investigated
and intimidated, forcing many to disband. Schools are under tight
surveillance, with new regulations placing emphasis on national security
requirements in education. Media face the same sorts of investigations,
arrests, and pressures, with leading opposition media forced to close.
Both Hongkongers and the world face official indifference as to their
concerns over the collapse of the promised liberal order.

KEYWORDS: Hong Kong, constitutionalism, human rights, rule of law,
          free speech, democracy, national security, elections, China,
          repression.


                                 Contents

 I.     Background
 II.    Criminal Justice: The Crushing of Human Rights and the Rule of Law
 III.   Undercutting Political Freedom
 IV.    The Rollback of Democracy
 V.     The Path Forward
Beijing’s National Security Law and the Destruction of                            23
the Liberal Constitutional Order in Hong Kong

I. Background

     The world is very familiar with the special character of Hong Kong
as one of the world’s leading cities of commerce, finance, and culture,
widely respected for its freedoms and rule of law. The 1984 Sino-British
                    1                                                 2
Joint Declaration and the 1990 Hong Kong Basic Law sought to
preserve Hong Kong’s special character. They offer a very liberal
constitutional framework, as was thought necessary to maintain Hong
Kong as an open and rule-of-law-based society and to preserve the
international human rights protections long-afforded its people. Hong
Kong people and the world would not have relied on anything less.

     Despite official arguments to the contrary, it is extremely difficult to
interpret the comprehensive guarantees in these founding documents as
envisioning anything other than a liberal constitutional order. The
guarantees for Hong Kong include a high degree of autonomy, human
rights, and the rule of law, as well as promises of self-rule through
“universal suffrage”. These guarantees promise that the courts will be
independent and final and expressly commit to continued application of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). The
Hong Kong Bill of Rights incorporates the ICCPR content nearly
verbatim. The highest courts in Hong Kong quickly understood that they
had the power of constitutional judicial review to maintain such



1 Joint Declaration of the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
  Northern Ireland and the Government of the People’s Republic of China on the
  Question of Hong Kong [hereinafter Joint Declaration], Dec. 19, 1984, effective May
  27, 1985, https://www.cmab.gov.hk/en/issues/jd2.htm.
2 The Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s
  Republic of China [hereinafter Basic Law], Apr. 4, 1990, effective July 1, 1997,
  https://www.basiclaw.gov.hk/en/basiclaw/index.html.
24                                  《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



commitments. To preserve the integrity of the separate system, the Basic
Law further provides that mainland laws will not apply in Hong Kong
except for a limited number beyond the territory’s autonomy, to be listed
                                3
in Basic Law, Annex III. To emphasize this separation, mainland
officials are not to “interfere in affairs which the Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region administers on its own in accordance with this
      4
law.” Basic Law article 23, of relevance to the current debate, further
provides that Hong Kong shall enact national security protections “on its
own.”

     Both Hong Kong people and the international community were
asked to rely on these solemn commitments and largely did so for over
two decades after the 1997 handover — even while Beijing interventions
slowly eroded the city’s autonomy. Despite such erosion, with
committed courts and vigorous activism on the ground, Hong Kong
often secured the top spot in the Heritage Foundation’s Index of
Economic Freedom and saw its rule of law ranked among the top in the
          5
world.

     Weaknesses in the Basic Law model included Beijing’s complete
control over interpretation of the Basic Law and its foot-dragging over
realization of the promised universal suffrage. These two limitations
have led to many protests over the years, as Hongkongers feared the


3 Basic Law art. 18 allows for some mainland laws outside the scope of autonomy to be
  added to Annex III.
4 Basic Law art. 22 (H.K.).
5 Natalie Lung, Hong Kong Dumped from Economic Freedom List It Had Dominated,
  BLOOMBERG (Mar. 4, 2021), https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-03-04/
  hong-kong-dumped-from-economic-freedom-index-it-used-to-dominate; and WJP
  Rule of Law Index, WORLD JUSTICE PROJECT, https://worldjusticeproject.org/rule-of-
  law-index (last visited Nov. 21, 2021).
Beijing’s National Security Law and the Destruction of                             25
the Liberal Constitutional Order in Hong Kong

degrading of their promised autonomy and the associated risk to the rule
of law. Efforts to blame the many protests on local malcontents or
foreign interference — allegedly promoting a color revolution — are
misguided. Clearly, the mostly peaceful Hong Kong protesters had cause
to be concerned about the failure of the Hong Kong government to guard
the city’s autonomy.

      Any reliance on Beijing’s commitments largely unraveled in 2019,
with a massive crackdown on protesters demanding compliance with
those very commitments and in 2020 with Beijing’s imposition of a
National Security Law (NSL) — and later in 2021 with new electoral
          6
changes. In the past couple years, the crushing of the rule of law and
the abandonment of core human rights has been unprecedented for a
modern highly developed open society. Beijing’s model for its direct
control has become evident, as it abandons the liberal order and installs a
national security constitution in Hong Kong.



II. Criminal Justice: The Crushing of Human Rights
    and the Rule of Law

      The NSL undermines the foundations for the rule of law,
undercutting core elements of Hong Kong’s common law system and the
core elements of the city’s criminal justice tradition. Passed without any
public consultation, the NSL imposes four crimes in the speech area —



6   National People’s Congress of the People’s Republic of China (PRC), The Law of the
    People’s Republic of China on Safeguarding National Security in the Hong Kong
    Special Administrative Region, June 30, 2020, https://www.elegislation.gov.hk/doc/
    hk/a406/eng_translation_(a406)_en.pdf.
26                                   《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



secession, subversion, terrorist activities, and collusion with foreign
forces — whose vagueness leave speakers with little sense of what is
prohibited and what is not. These crimes apply worldwide regardless of
nationality. These vague crimes have been used to silence opposition
voices in Hong Kong, including street protesters, political organizations,
the media, academics, the arts, and numerous politicians. Many of those
arrested have been highly respected community leaders simply fighting
for the guaranteed freedoms. With an NSL presumption against bail, a
majority of those prosecuted — 165 arrest and 96 prosecutions so far —
                                                7
languish in jail for months awaiting trial.

     Such NSL arrests are only the tip of the criminal justice iceberg.
Well over ten-thousand protesters were arrested for the 2019 protests
under existing public order laws, with over 2,500 charged and hundreds
                                                            8
already convicted, many with long jail terms.                   Prominent political
leaders well known both in Hong Kong and foreign capitals, including
Martin Lee, Margaret Ng, Benny Tai, Jimmy Lai, Joshua Wong and
                                                                9
Cheuk-yan Lee have been among those convicted. These prominent
leaders had all advocated non-violence during the recent protests.




7 Lydia Wong & Thomas E. Kellogg, New Data Show Hong Kong’s National Security
  Arrests Follow a Pattern, CHINA FILE (May 3, 2021), https://www.chinafile.com/
  reporting-opinion/features/new-data-show-hong-kongs-national-security-arrests-follow-
  pattern.
8 Ng Kang-chung, Hong Kong Protests: More than 10,200 Arrested in Connection with
  Unrest since 2019, Government Tells Lawmakers, SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST (Apr.
  9, 2021), https://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/politics/article/3128836/hong-kong-
  protests-more-10200-arrested-connection-unrest.
9 Helen Davidson, Hong Kong Pro-democracy Figures Given Jail Terms of Up to 18
  Months, THE GUARDIAN (Apr. 16, 2021), https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/
  apr/16/jimmy-lai-martin-lee-hong-kong-pro-democracy-figures-sentenced.
Beijing’s National Security Law and the Destruction of                              27
the Liberal Constitutional Order in Hong Kong

     NSL prosecutions have targeted a large portion of the political
opposition. By prosecuting publisher Jimmy Lai and the management
and editorial teams of the Apple Daily newspaper, along with the use of
financial tools to force the paper’s closure, the leading media opposition
voice has been silenced. Jimmy Lai’s bail denial went all the way to the
Court of Final Appeal, where the court concluded that it had no power to
overturn any provisions of the NSL that violate Basic Law or common
law principles — it thereby upheld the presumption against bail in NSL
           10
article 42.

     The arrests and prosecutions under the NSL of 47 politicians for
organizing and participating in an opposition political primary sent a
clear message of political intolerance. Of the 47 charged, 36 were denied
bail and have languished in jail for months. Their alleged subversion
appears to relate to an intention, should they win enough seats in the
then planned Legislative Council election, to vote down the
government’s budget and thereby force the resignation of the Chief
              11
Executive.         Hong Kong may stand alone as a place, where using a
constitutional provision to defeat the government in power is treated as
subversion. Both these cases and the many others not mentioned here all
relate to speech crimes in one form or another.

     The prosecution and conviction of a young street activists, Tong
Ying Kit, was the first of two NSL trials completed as of this writing.
Tong was charged after he drove his motorcycle into a police cordon
causing some minor injuries. He was convicted for incitement to


10 HKSAR v. Lai Chee Ying, (2021) 24 H.K.C.F.A.R. 33 (C.F.A.).
11 Explainer: How a Primary Got Hong Kong Activists in Trouble, ASSOCIATED PRESS
   NEWS (Mar. 1, 2021), https://apnews.com/article/beijing-primary-elections-democracy-
   hong-kong-elections-ccda7eb61403f721ba8e56423203f72a.
28                                      《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



secession for carrying a flag on his bike with the popular slogan,
                                                                12
“Liberate Hong Kong, Revolution of Our Times.”                       In the High Court
he was denied a jury under a special NSL provision allowing the
prosecution to opt for a three-judge panel. Even though NSL article 4
provides for continued application of the international human rights
guarantees under the Basic Law, the court’s judgment did not even
mention human rights, as is usually applicable regarding incitement in
                             13
national security cases.          In what appeared to be simply reckless driving,
he was further convicted of terrorism. There was no indication that his
actions instigated any popular fear. His total sentence for both charges
was 9 years — with the case now under appeal.

       We should be skeptical about protection of due process rights in the
coming NSL trials. The NSL, which effectively amends the Basic Law,
completely undermines the prior commitments to autonomy and the rule
of law, introducing mainland control and methods into the Hong Kong
system. It creates a local Committee for Safeguarding National Security
(headed by the Chief Executive with a mainland adviser) and an Office
for Safeguarding National Security, the latter staffed entirely by
mainland public security officials. Both oversee local national security
investigations and requirements, and neither is subject to judicial review
by the local courts. These oversight organizations are backed up by
special branches who operate in secret in both the Hong Kong police and
the Department of Justice. The Committee for Safeguarding National
Security has already issued special regulations for police that allow for


12 HKSAR v. Tong Ying Kit, HCCC 280/2020 (C.F.I. July 27, 2021) (Legal Reference
     System) (H.K.).
13 See Michael C. Davis, National Security Trial Ruling a Setback for Human Rights in
     Hong Kong, SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST (Aug. 4, 2021), https://scmp.com/comment/
     opinion/article/3143634/national-security-trial-ruling-setback-human-rights-hong-kong.
Beijing’s National Security Law and the Destruction of                             29
the Liberal Constitutional Order in Hong Kong

warrantless searches, surrender of travel documents, seizure and
confiscation of property, interception of communications and secret
              14
surveillance.

     These mainland intrusions have put the courts and the legal
profession under severe stress, compromising judicial independence and
fair trial rights. Beijing’s distrust of independent judges is on full display
under the NSL, which requires that only judges designated by the Chief
Executive can hear NSL cases. Such designated judges are subject to
removal from the list if they make statements that offend national
security — presumably in court. Result oriented oversight does not stop
there. The Secretary for Justice can withhold the right to a jury in High
Court cases where juries are typically allowed, as was done in the Tong
Ying Kit case. Judges have been under pressure, being subject to public
attacks by Beijing officials and media if they dismiss cases or grant bail.
The Court of Final Appeal faced a seeming threat published in the
People’s Daily, that the case might be removed to the mainland for trial
                                          15
if Jimmy Lai were granted bail.                NSL article 55 allows official
discretion for such removal in complex cases.

     Lawyers have not escaped these attacks. The People’s Daily
recently likened the Hong Kong Bar to “street rats” and warned the Law
Society to stay out of politics in its leadership election. The then Bar
President, Paul Harris, was attacked for suggesting revisions to the NSL.


14 Implementation Rules for Article 43 of the Law of the People’s Republic of China on
   Safeguarding National Security in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
   Gazetted, GOVHK PRESS RELEASE (July 6, 2020), https://www.info.gov.hk/gia/general/
   202007/06/P2020070600784.htm.
15 See Su Di, Observer: Approving Jimmy Lai’s Bail Harmful to Hong Kong’s Rule of
   Law, PEOPLE’S DAILY (Dec. 28, 2020), https://peoplesdaily.pdnews.cn/opinions/
   observer-approving-jimmy-lai-s-bail-harmful-to-hong-kong-s-rule-of-law-190555.html.
30                                     《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



The lawyer representing the legal functional sector in the Legislative
Council, Dennis Kwok, was also forced out of office in November 2020,
resulting in all opposition Legislative Council members resigning in
protest. Even lawyers’ groups formed to promote due process or provide
pro-bono legal services to protesters, including the Progressive Lawyers
Group and the 612 Humanitarian Relief Fund, have been threatened with
prosecutions and forced to disband.



III. Undercutting Political Freedom

       The NSL does not only provide for national security prosecutions,
but rather in article 9 requires the government “to take necessary
measures to strengthen public communication, guidance, supervision
and regulation… relating to schools, universities, social organizations,
the media, and the internet.” This includes a requirement in article 10 to
“promote national security education in schools and universities and
through social organizations, the media, the internet and other means…”
The government has issued regulations requiring schools at all levels to
teach national security and has warned universities and the media about
possible violations — presumably involving critical views that do not
match Chinese Communist Party (CCP) orthodoxy, expressed on
                                                16
campus by either teachers or students.               These efforts at brainwashing


16 Education Bureau of Hong Kong, Education Bureau Circular No. 2/2021: National
     Security Education in School Curriculum — Implementation Mode and Learning and
     Teaching Resources (Feb. 4, 2021), https://applications.edb.gov.hk/circular/upload/
     EDBC/EDBC21002E.pdf; and Education Bureau of Hong Kong, Education Bureau
     Circular No. 3/2021: National Security: Maintaining a Safe Learning Environment
     Nurturing Good Citizens (Feb. 4, 2021), https://applications.edb.gov.hk/circular/
     upload/EDBC/EDBC21003E.pdf.
Beijing’s National Security Law and the Destruction of                          31
the Liberal Constitutional Order in Hong Kong

                                                                                17
have led thousands to emigrate or send their children abroad for study.
In traditional CCP Marxist style, professors have been attacked in
official media as “reactionary academics” and even supporters as “loyal
            18
rubbish.”        Student organizations have also come under attack and
student unions have disband, as has the 95,000-member Professional
Teachers Union (PTU), which was characterized by China’s Xinhua
                                             19
news agency as a “malignant tumor.”               Even statues commemorating
1989 Tiananmen crackdown have been ordered removed from campuses,
including the “Pillar of Shame” sculpture at the University of Hong
       20
Kong.       The Global Public Policy Institute has recently given Hong
                                                                  21
Kong a D-rating on academic freedom in its global survey.

     Intimidation stretches well beyond campuses. Government officials,
elected or otherwise, have been forced to take loyalty oaths. Such oaths
are then weaponized to disqualify people who have supported the
political opposition or said anything judged disloyal in their past. Civil
servants, subsequently judged to have made a false oath, face a loss of
job and even their pensions, being dismissed for cause. Recognizing this


17 Vivian Wang, ‘This Drop Came So Quickly’: Shrinking Schools Add to Hong Kong
   Exodus, N.Y. TIMES (Oct. 11, 2021), https://www.nytimes.com/2021/10/11/world/
   asia/hong-kong-population-drop.html.
18 Au Ka-lun, A New Cultural Revolution Is on Its Way, APPLE DAILY (Mar. 26, 2021),
   https://collection.news/appledaily/articles/GDMGSIJ2AVBOLLW7QC5BUJUBY4.
19 Lilian Cheng & Chris Lau, Hong Kong’s Biggest Teachers’ Union ‘Seeks to Speed Up
   Dissolution by Changing Its Rules’ as Beijing Attack Continues, SOUTH CHINA
   MORNING POST (Aug. 11, 2021), https://scmp.com/news/hong-kong/politics/article/
   3144711/hong-kongs-biggest-teachers-union-seeks-speed-dissolution.
20 Shibani Mahtani, Hong Kong’s ‘Pillar of Shame’ Sculpture for Tiananmen Victims
   Faces Removal, WASH. POST (Oct. 13, 2021), https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/
   asia_pacific/hongkong-pillar-shame-tiananmen/2021/10/13/2a897036-2b0a-11ec-b17d-
   985c186de338_story.html.
21 Hong Kong’s Global Academic Freedom Index Regresses C-level to D-level, Lower
   than Vietnam, Causing Concern, APPLE DAILY (Apr. 2021) (no longer available).
32                                     《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



purpose, 260 members of the District Council, being the only level of
government that had previously been almost fully directly elected,
resigned, rather than take the oath. 55 opposition District Counsellors
who stayed on to take the oath were then disqualified, with their historic
                                                         22
opposition being used to question their loyalty.

      Most independent civil society organizations that traditionally
supported the opposition, have now been threatened with prosecution
                                23
and forced to disband.               Similar to the PTU, intimidation and
disbanding has targeted, e.g., the Civil Human Rights Front, the Labor
Party, the Confederation of Trade Unions, the Social Workers General
Union, the League of Social Democrats, and the Hong Kong Alliance in
Support of the Patriotic Democratic Movement in China. The arrest of a
member (along with four other members) of the latter organization,
lawyer Ms. Chow Hang-tung, has been condemned by UN experts:
“Terrorism and sedition charges are being improperly used to stifle the
exercise of fundamental rights, which are protected under international
law, including freedom of expression and opinion, freedom of peaceful
                                                                       24
assembly and the right to participate in public affairs.”                   The experts
also raised concern that Hong Kong was imposing undue restrictions in


22 Of 452 directly elected district councillors elected in the last allowed election 392
   were from the opposition camp. Owen Churchill, US, Britain, and EU Voice
   Objections to Hong Kong’s Disqualification of Opposition District Councillors,
   SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST (Oct. 22, 2021), https://www.scmp.com/news/china/
   article/3153223/us-and-britain-voice-objections-hong-kongs-disqualification-opposition.
23 Suzanne Pepper, Hong Kong’s Civil Society under Fire: the Candidates, the Election,
   then the Democracy Movement Itself, HONG KONG FREE PRESS (Sept. 3, 2021),
   https://hongkongfp.com/2021/09/03/hong-kongs-civil-society-under-fire-the-candi
   dates-the-election-then-the-democracy-movement-itself/.
24 Hong Kong: Arrests under Security Law Are Serious Concern, UN Experts Call for
   Review, OHCHR (Oct. 12, 2021), https://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/
   DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=27648&LangID=E.
Beijing’s National Security Law and the Destruction of                              33
the Liberal Constitutional Order in Hong Kong

accusing such organizations of collusion merely for receiving foreign
funding.

     Media intimidation likewise reaches beyond the forced closure of
the Apple Daily, including most prominently the growing pressure on
RTHK, the public service broadcaster long modeled on the BBC, that
has now issued a 100-plus page editorial guideline for reporters that aims
                                                                            25
to insure NSL compliance and top-down editorial control.                         The
government has announced an intention to pair RTHK with the
                                                                                    26
mainland’s CCTV to encourage stronger patriotism among viewers.
The government has also appointed a new Director of Public
Broadcasting from the Hong Kong civil service to better insure
compliance — resulting in diminished independence and critical
programing being withdrawn. Across the city art exhibits and critical
                                                     27
documentaries have also come under attack.                A new bill just passed
                                                                          28
will allow the banning of films on NSL grounds without appeal.                 In the
most extreme case, two speech therapists have been charged with sedition


25 RADIO TELEVISION HONG KONG, EDITORIAL POLICIES AND PROCESSES OF RADIO
   TELEVISION HONG KONG (Sept. 2021), http://rthk9.rthk.hk/about/pdf/epp_eng.pdf.
26 Rhoda Kwan, Hong Kong’s RTHK Will Become State Media after Partnership with
   China’s CCTV, Says Press Group Chief, HONG KONG FREE PRESS (Aug. 11, 2021),
   https://hongkongfp.com/2021/08/11/hong-kongs-rthk-will-become-state-media-after-
   partnership-with-chinas-cctv-says-press-group-chief/.
27 HG Masters, Hong Kong Arts Sector Faces New Political Scrutiny, ARTASIAPACIFIC
   (Mar. 18, 2021), http://www.artasiapacific.com/News/HongKongArtsSectorFacesNew
   PoliticalScrutiny; Candice Chau, Hong Kong Campus Protest Documentary
   Screening Cancelled Hours before Showing Following Attack by Pro-Beijing Paper,
   HONG KONG FREE PRESS (Mar. 15, 2021), https://hongkongfp.com/2021/03/15/hong-
   kong-campus-protest-documentary-screening-cancelled-hours-before-showing-follow
   ing-attack-by-pro-beijing-paper/.
28 Kelly Ho, Hong Kong Passes Bill to Censor Films ‘Contrary’ to China’s National
   Security — HK$1m Fine, 3 Years Jail for Offenders, HONG KONG FREE PRESS (Oct.
   27, 2021), https://hongkongfp.com/2021/10/27/hong-kong-passes-bill-to-censor-
   films-contrary-to-chinas-national-security-hk1m-fine-3-years-jail-for-offenders/.
34                                    《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）



for publishing a children’s book depicting sheep attacked by wolves.



IV. The Rollback of Democracy

       Beijing has completely remodeled the electoral system to exclude
the pro-democracy opposition from any role in government. The new
electoral amendments in the Basic Law, set up a comprehensive system
for vetting candidates to allow only “patriots” to run. While the number
of legislative seats has been increased from 70 to 90, the number directly
elected by geographical constituencies has been reduced from 35 to 20.
Forty of the legislators are now to be selected by the Beijing friendly
Election Committee. Historically, the 1200-member Election Committee
was selected mostly by functional sectors, whose makeup effectively
insured 80 percent would invariably support a Beijing-friendly candidate.
The Committee is now further tilted.

       The Election Committee is now increased from 1200 to 1500
members, with the additional 300 being Beijing-selected Hong Kong
representatives to the Central Government. The functional sectors have
now been modified in comprehensive ways to guarantee only “patriots”
are elected to the committee. The seats previously held by the elected
District Councilors have been given over to mainland affiliated
organizations. As a result of these and other changes, in the recent
Election Committee election 75 percent of the seats were filled
                29
uncontested.


29 Lilian Cheng, Record Number of Uncontested Seats for Hong Kong Election
     Committee Polls — and Li Ka-shing Is Not Throwing His Hat into Ring, for the First
     Time since 1997, SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST (Aug. 12, 2021), https://scmp.com/
Beijing’s National Security Law and the Destruction of                            35
the Liberal Constitutional Order in Hong Kong

     The Election Committee is now required to vet all candidates for
Chief Executive and the Legislative Council on top of choosing the
Chief Executive and 40 legislators. A small Candidate Eligibility Review
Committee, composed of Beijing loyalists, will first vet the candidates
and submit its findings to the Election Committee. This vetting
committee will vet all candidates for elective office. It will be overseen
by the Committee for Safeguarding National Security and all candidates
will be investigated by the national security police unit. Opposition
candidates run at their peril, at risk of being disqualified as non-patriots,
and possibly prosecuted. No candidates from the leading pan-democratic
parties participated in the December 2021 Legislative Council election.
It is now illegal for anyone to advocate boycotting the election or
spoiling ballots, though voters can do so individually — with only 32
percent of eligible voters participating in the recent election.



V. The Path Forward

     The “One Country, Two Systems” model promised Hong Kong has
surely been abandoned, in any recognizable form. Both Hong Kong
people and the wider world long engaged with Hong Kong will now face
a challenge of what to do in the face of such overwhelming oppression.
In my own judgment, the narrow sanctions that have been used so far
have had very little impact and may at worst cause Beijing to impose
more draconian measures as blowback, as reflected in Beijing’s recently




   news/hong-kong/politics/article/3144856/hong-kong-politics-record-number-uncontest
   ed-seats-election.
36                                     《中研院法學期刊》2022特刊（2022年5月）


                                     30
proposed anti-sanctions law.              Concerned governments will have to
examine their international trade and exchange policies in a more
comprehensive and multilateral way that advances the international
human rights policies they may cherish, as contained in the international
human rights regime. It is in every country’s national interest that trade
and finance does not operate outside national policies that seek to
promote human rights. Beijing controlled companies, as well as Hong
Kong and other foreign companies that operate in Hong Kong, have
often been coopted to support Beijing’s hardline policies. Their
operations are clearly at the heart of Beijing’s concerns with respect to
the city.

       The challenge will be to create a regulatory regime that incentivizes
appropriate human rights behavior both in official policy and private
activity. The US has already unilaterally built some of this sort of
commercial oversight, to list companies that appear to violate US policy
in this and related regards. Rather than unilateral sanctions such policy
goals might best be achieved in a multilateral framework. Such a
framework would aim to create human rights incentives that
international businesses and other organizations would be expected to
adhere to in conducting their activities. The current paper is not the place
to tease this wider framework out but, at first glance, it would surely
include some of the best practices regarding social responsibility in the
literature on corporate social responsibility. A charter might be created
that reaches beyond the immediate Hong Kong issues to include wider



30 Jeffie Lam, No Timetable for Hong Kong Anti-sanctions Law, Finance Chief Paul
     Chan Says, SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST (Oct. 1, 2021), https://scmp.com/news/
     hong-kong/politics/article/3150925/no-timetable-hong-kong-anti-sanctions-law-finance-
     chief.
Beijing’s National Security Law and the Destruction of                   37
the Liberal Constitutional Order in Hong Kong

global practice. Countries that sign on to such a charter would be
expected to enforce its principles in local law both as to entities
organized locally and for those that practice within local jurisdiction.
There could be a committee structure to report adherence to such
requirements. Private causes of action might be allowed to supplement
official oversight — as is even the case for Beijing’s domestic anti-
sanctions law. In the PRC context, similar issues have come up relating
to Xinjiang and Tibet, as well as Hong Kong, but Beijing is not alone in
this regard. The best approach to incorporate human rights concerns in
the commercial and international organizational sector will require more
substantial international discussions, but such a regulatory regime might
offer a more acceptable incentive-based approach than the tit-for-tat
approach currently available through unilateral sanctioning of officials.

     In the interim, it seems most foreign policies directed at these
developments in Hong Kong will target immigration access to provide
sanctuary for those who want to leave the city. Immigration policies can
look to the efficiency of access to the asylum regime and offering
immigration options to those most at risks who do not qualify for asylum
in the traditional sense. University graduates holding degrees from the
host country’s universities or Hong Kong people who have spent
substantial time abroad may suffer the greatest loss under the current
repressive policies and seek an exit for themselves or their families.
