 Article
Academia Sinica Law Journal                                                          41
Issue 34, pp. 41-80 (March 2024)


                                                                   ＊
                  The Price of Autonomy:
 Liability Standards for Complementary and Substitutive
       Medical Robotics and Artificial Intelligence

                                                     ＊＊
                              Frank Pasquale


                                     Abstract
      When AI or robotics assist a professional, they are tools. In
medicine, the doctrine of “competent human intervention” has tended to
shift liability away from those who make devices and toward the
professionals who use them. However, the professional in such scenarios
should not bear the entire burden of responsibility. Tools can be
defective, and vendors of defective, complementary AI and robotics
should be held responsible for negligence. The burden of proof should
still be on the plaintiff to demonstrate that not only a skilled medical
professional, but also the maker of the tools used by such a professional,
should be held liable for a preventable adverse outcome.
     When AI and robotics replace, rather than merely assist, a skilled
medical professional, the vendor of such computational systems needs to
take on more responsibility for errors and accidents. In the medical field,

＊  Submission Date: July 31, 2019; Acceptance Date: January 3, 2023. [Line Editor:
   You syuan Lu & Chia Yo Yan].
   I wish to thank expert audiences at National Taiwan University and Academia
   Sinica for greatly enriching my understanding of this area. I also wish to thank
   anonymous peer reviewers and Anita Bernstein for thoughtful comments. Any
   errors remain my own responsibility. By mutual agreement of all publication
   venues, a version of this article has also appeared in The Cambridge Handbook off
   Artificial Intelligence: Global Perspectives on Law and Ethics, and in Ius et Praxis.
＊＊ Professor of Law, Cornell Tech and Cornell Law School.
   Online: https://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/40306142.pdf.
42                                     《中研院法學期刊》第34期（2024年3月）


there has long been a standard of competent professional supervision of
the deployment of advanced technology. When substitutive automation
endangers patients by short-circuiting that supervision, it is both
defective and unreasonably dangerous. Nevertheless, at the damages
phase of litigation, the vendor of the substitutive AI should be entitled to
explain how damages should be mitigated based on its AI’s performance
relative to the extant human- or human-machine-based standard of care.
Such responsibility for explanation will serve an important information-
forcing function in areas where public understanding is often limited by
trade secrecy.
     As law and political economy methods demonstrate, law cannot be
neutral with respect to markets for new technology. It constructs these
markets, making certain futures more or less likely. Distinguishing
between technology that substitutes for human expertise and that which
complements professionals is fundamental not just to labor policy and
the political economy of automation, but also to tort law.

KEYWORDS: artificial intelligence (AI), robotics, liability, automation,
          automated decision making, malpractice, enterprise
          liability, professions, political economy, clinical decision
          support software.


                                   Contents

 I.     Introduction
 II.    A Negligence Standard for Complementary Robotics
 III.   Strict Liability for Substitutive Automation
 IV.    Concluding Remarks: Virtues of a Mixed Negligence-Strict Liability
        Regime
The Price of Autonomy                                                                   43


I. Introduction

      There are now robotic applications for nursing home patients, the
mentally ill, and other vulnerable populations. These advanced
technologies raise critical liability questions for the medical profession.
Consider the case of robotically assistive surgical devices (RASDs)
which surgeons use to control small cutting and grasping devices. If a
surgeon’s hand slips with a scalpel, and a vital tendon is cut, our intuitive
sense is that the surgeon bears the primary responsibility for the resultant
malpractice suit. But the vendor of an RASD may eventually market a
machine which has a special “tendon avoidance subroutine,” akin to the
alarms that automobiles now sound when their sensors indicate a likely
collision. If the tendon sensors fail, and the warning does not sound
before an errant cut is made, may the harmed patient sue the vendor of
the RASD? Or only the physician who relied on it?

      Similar problems arise in the context of some therapy apps. For
example, a counselor may tell a patient with substance use disorder
(SUD) to use an app in order to track cravings, states of mind, and other
information helpful to those trying to cure addictions. The app may
recommend certain actions in case the counselor cannot be reached. If
these actions are contraindicated and result in harm to the patient or
others, is the app to blame? Or the doctor who prescribed it? Or both?
Home health care businesses may encounter similar dilemmas as they
                                      1
deploy so-called “care robots.”



1   For a fascinating overview of legal issues raised by care robots, see Valarie K. Blake,
    Regulating Care Robots, 92 TEMP. L. REV. 551 (2020). For examples of medical
    automation gone awry, see ROBERT WACHTER, THE DIGITAL DOCTOR: HOPE, HYPE,
    AND HARM AT THE DAWN OF MEDICINE’S COMPUTER AGE (2015).
44                                         《中研院法學期刊》第34期（2024年3月）



      Of course, in neither the surgical nor the mental health scenario is
the answer necessarily binary. There may be shared liability, based on an
apportionment of responsibility. But before courts can trigger such an
apportionment, they must have a clear theory upon which to base the
responsibility of vendors of technology.

      This article develops such an approach. What is offered here is not
a detailed blueprint for liability determinations in any particular
jurisdiction. Instead, this article presents a binary approach toward ideal-
typical liability situations intended to structure policy discussions on
                                                                                  2
liability for harm caused by AI and robotics in medical contexts. The
binary is the distinction between substitutive and complementary
              3
automation. When AI and robotics substitutes for a physician, strict
liability is more appropriate than standard negligence doctrine. When the
same technology merely assists a professional, a less stringent standard
is appropriate. Such standards will help ensure that the deployment of
advanced medical technologies is accomplished in a way that
complements extant professionals’ skills, while promoting patient safety.

      As law and political economy methods demonstrate, law cannot be
                                                                4
neutral with respect to markets for new technology. It constructs these



2 This article will draw on common law principles in many jurisdictions, in order to
  inform a general policy discussion. It does not attempt to give detailed legal guidance,
  or map how courts presently do handle cases involving AI and complex computation
  in medical contexts. Rather, cases and other legal materials are drawn upon to
  illustrate the complement/substitute distinction.
3 This distinction may also be styled as a contrast between artificial intelligence (AI)
  and intelligence augmentation (IA). However, that contrast would probably confuse
  matters at present, given that much of what is called AI in contemporary legal and
  policy discussions is narrow enough to be IA.
4 See Martha T. McCluskey, Frank Pasquale & Jennifer Taub, Law and Economics:
  Contemporary Approaches, 35 YALE L. & POL’Y REV. 297 (2016).
The Price of Autonomy                                                                  45


markets, making certain futures more or less likely. Distinguishing
between technology that substitutes for human expertise and that which
complements professionals is fundamental to both labor policy and the
political economy of automation.

      For example, in the case of computerized physician order entry
(CPOE) for prescriptions, a “drug-drug interaction” alert (DDI) could
simply warn a physician about possible side effects from simultaneous
                            5
ingestion of two pills. That is complementary automation. If the DDI
alert were, in fact, incorrect, a harmed patient could sue both the
physician and the vendor of the CPOE system, but the burden should be
on the patient to demonstrate the CPOE system’s vendor failed to follow
the proper standard of care in updating data or improving algorithms in
order to avoid the problem. And the physician might still bear all or most
of the responsibility, under the doctrine of competent human intervention.

      By contrast, some CPOE systems of the future may simply “decide
everything” with respect to the prescription of the two pills, preventing
the doctor from prescribing them together. In such a scenario, the
physician is no longer responsible—she or he cannot override the system.
Given this extraordinary deviation from ordinary professional standards
in medicine—which require a skilled person to mediate between
technology and the patient—it is appropriate to impose strict liability up
and down the distribution chain of such a substitutive AI. Under a strict
liability standard, in case of a preventable adverse event, the
manufacturer, distributor, and retailer of the product may be liable, even
if they were not at fault.

5   For a good typology of potential scenarios arising in the context of assistive AI, see
    generally W. Nicholson Price, II, Sara Gerke & I. Glenn Cohen, Potential Liability for
    Physicians Using Artificial Intelligence, 322 JAMA 1765 (2019).
46                                         《中研院法學期刊》第34期（2024年3月）



      This may seem like an unduly harsh standard. However, the
doctrine of strict liability arose in response to those who sold “any
product in a defective condition unreasonably dangerous to the user or
                                   6
consumer or to his property.” In the medical field, there has long been a
standard of competent professional supervision and monitoring of the
                                                7
deployment of advanced technology. When substitutive automation
short-circuits that review, it is both defective and unreasonably
dangerous. It also tends toward the diminution of the distributed
                                                 8
expertise so critical to medical advance.

      This article develops the complementary and substitutive categories
via two case studies. Part II explores the complementary role of RASDs,
and some litigation that has arisen regarding them. Part III introduces
substitutive AI and robotics, and demonstrates the ways in which strict
liability standards are likely necessary to promote accountability in their
development and deployment, to preserve a unitary standard of care, and
to promote public awareness of their shortcomings. Part IV concludes
with reflections on the current utility of, and potential challenges to, the
substitutive/complementary dichotomy.



6 RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF TORTS § 402A (AM. L. INST. 1979).
7 This article addresses policymakers governing health systems with this standard of
  care. Those in charge of less developed health systems (coping with physician or
  other staff shortages) may well decide that strict liability is too harsh a standard: if
  there is no viable human alternative, why discourage direct access to a machine?
  Those in many of the more developed health systems need to acknowledge their own
  responsibility for this state of affairs. See Frank Pasquale, Access to Medicine in an
  Era of Fractal Inequality, 19 ANNALS HEALTH L. 269 (2010) (describing direct and
  indirect ways in which medical resources are directed away from the developing and
  toward the developed world).
8 For an extended argument for the ideal of distributed expertise, see generally FRANK
  PASQUALE, NEW LAWS OF ROBOTICS: DEFENDING HUMAN EXPERTISE IN THE AGE OF
  AI (2020).
The Price of Autonomy                                                               47


II. A Negligence Standard for Complementary Robotics

      Prostate surgery has seen rapid adoption of robotics with over 80%
of the surgeries are performed robotically. Hundreds of urological
surgeons have adopted the Da Vinci Surgical Robot over the past decade.
The rapid adoption of the RASDs in prostate surgery demonstrates just
how fast a new machine can change the face of practice for hundreds of
                          9
thousands of patients.

      At the outset, it is important to be clear about the terminology and
effects of machines like the da Vinci robot. The device itself does not
complete the surgery. Rather, it is an extremely sophisticated tool
deployed by a skilled surgeon. The surgeon operates at a console,
manipulating instruments from afar. What distinguishes robotic surgery
from its predecessor, laparoscopic surgery, is that rather than merely
deploying a tube with a cutter and a grabber at each end, the surgeon
using an RASD has more dexterity—the device can twist around and act
as a second wrist or eleventh finger. These RASDs took off at first in
urology, because many urological and gynecological procedures involve
very sensitive tissue that can only be accessed through a small opening


9   See Gina Kolata, Results Unproven, Robotic Surgery Wins Converts, N.Y. TIMES (Feb.
    13, 2010), http://www.nytimes.com/2010/02/14/health/14robot.html?pagewanted=1&hp;
    compare Giacomo Novara et al., Systematic Review and Meta-analysis of Perioperative
    Outcomes and Complications After Robot-assisted Radical Prostatectomy, 62 EUR.
    UROLOGY 431 (2012), with Surgical Robots Market Size, Share & Trends Analysis
    Report By Application (Orthopedics, Neurology, Urology, Gynecology), By Region
    (North America, Europe, Asia Pacific, LATAM, MEA), and Segment Forecasts,
    2023 – 2030, GRAND VIEW RES. (Apr. 2016), http://www.grandviewresearch.com/
    industry-analysis/surgical-robot-market. Legal scholarship addressing the surgical
    robotics market includes Andrew Chin, Surgically Precise but Kinematically Abstract
    Patents, 55 HOUS. L. REV. 267 (2017) (describing how intellectual property law helps
    enable monopolistic business practices).
48                                  《中研院法學期刊》第34期（2024年3月）



at the base of the pelvic bowl. The device can achieve forms of
movement and illumination of tissue that would be impossible using
human hands alone.

     That is not to say that the transition from open to robotic
prostatectomy was an easy one. Surgeons who had worked their entire
lives through direct manual touch had to adopt their practice to what
could start off as an unintuitive imaging and manipulation system. At the
beginning, for many surgeons, the lack of direct touch—the so-called
haptic interface—made surgery more difficult or time-consuming.
However, over time, surgeons developed the ability to detect other cues
for the feel of tissue—for example, how quickly it moves once probed,
or how blood vessels blanch when the metallic ends of the robotic probe
contact them. For a surgeon who has already seen and more directly
prodded bodily tissue hundreds or thousands of times, the association of
certain sights with other feelings—of softness or hardness, thickness or
thinness—provide a reservoir of intuition about what the video from the
RASD is showing. One can think of adapting to a surgical RASD as the
development of skills somewhat like those required in a videogame
console control—so that just as the flick of a trigger on a joystick could
result in a kick for a player’s avatar in a game, so too can a small
movement in the Da Vinci console cause a cut or lift a vein. Moreover,
as video proliferates, the “second nature” of the screen may become a
“first nature” for trainees, and a source of data for machine learning
programs to identify past errors and deter future ones.

     According to some critics of health technology, the dissemination
of RASDs is yet another tale of healthcare spending gone out of control.
The devices can cost over $1 million, with high upkeep and maintenance
The Price of Autonomy                                                                   49


     10
fees.     Surgeons must invest valuable time to learn the ins and outs of
                                                                                   11
the new system. Some have questioned the value of the technology.

        But it is important to take this early medical evidence with a grain
of salt. One key problem emerges in many areas of clinical innovation—
those completing robotic surgeries in the first decade of studies could
only have had 5 to 10 years of experience using the robot, since it was so
new, while their output was sometimes being compared to the surgeries
of those who had perfected their skills in open prostatectomies for
decades. Outcome measures can also be unfairly narrow. For example,
according to some accounts, those who undergo a robotic surgery for
prostate cancer can often return home after just four days at the hospital,
while those undergoing open prostatectomies often take six or seven
days. In the case of kidney cancer, the smaller incision used for robotic
surgeries can lead to less pain and shorter recovery times. Surgeons who
use the RASDs tend to agree that the tools make surgery much easier
than pure manual manipulation. The human hand has not evolved to
manipulate a scalpel to make fine distinctions between healthy and
cancerous tissue; surgical robots can be specifically designed to take on


10 Cameron Scott, Is da Vinci Robotic Surgery a Revolution or a Rip-off?, HEALTHLINE
   (Aug. 10, 2016), https://www.healthline.com/health-news/is-da-vinci-robotic-surgery-
   revolution-or-ripoff-021215.
11 See Michelle Andrews, Gynecologists Question Use of Robotic Surgery For
   Hysterectomies, NPR (Apr. 23, 2013), http://www.npr.org/blogs/health/2013/04/23/
   178576759/gynecologists-question-use-of-robotic-surgery-for-hysterectomies; see also
   Statement on Robotic Surgery by ACOG President James T. Breeden, MD, DR. WHITTED
   (Mar. 14, 2013), http://drwhitted.net/statement-on-robotic-surgery; Hospitals Misleading
   Patients About Benefits of Robotic Surgery, Study Suggests, JOHNS HOPKINS MED. (May
   18, 2011), http://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/news/media/releases/hospitals_misleading_
   patients_about_benefits_of_robotic_surgery_study_suggests; Robotic Surgery: More
   Complications, Higher Expense for Some Conditions, COLUM. U. IRVING MED. CTR.
   (Oct. 8, 2014), http://newsroom.cumc.columbia.edu/blog/2014/10/08/robotic-surgery-
   complications-higher-expense-conditions/.
50                                       《中研院法學期刊》第34期（2024年3月）



this task. Videorecording via miniaturized cameras may also enable new
research on body tissue. This recording already helps speed the diffusion
of surgical innovations, as doctors share videos of particularly successful
surgical techniques at medical conferences.

     Complementary robotics are dominant now. To promote its
regulatory agenda in the area of robotic surgery in 2015, the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) announced a public workshop on
         12
RASDs.        Speakers included cutting edge physicians and firms. Neither
actual implementations of, nor planned development of, fully
autonomous surgical devices were high on the agenda. Admittedly, firms
planning fully autonomous systems may be in stealth mode—they could
lose current surgeons as clients if they talked too openly about replacing
them. And in 2016, a stitching robot did mark one notable exception to
                13
this pattern.        While acknowledging that “the current paradigm of
robot-assisted surgeries (RASs) depends entirely on an individual
surgeon’s manual capability,” inventors demonstrated that a robot could
stitch a split pig intestine together, besting the performance of human
surgeons. Billed as the “first autonomous robot” to operate, it managed
to bind a hole in soft tissue with speed and precision. The question, now,
is whether further industrial development in this area should try to
change the dominant trend in robotics, by replacing human surgeons—or


12 Public Workshop—Robotically-Assisted Surgical Devices: Challenges and Opportunities,
   July 27-28, 2015, U.S. FOOD & DRUG ADMIN. (2015), http://wayback.archive-it.org/
   7993/20170112084805/http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/NewsEvents/Workshops
   Conferences/ucm435255.htm.
13 See Azad Shademan et al., Supervised Autonomous Robotic Soft Tissue Surgery, 8 SCI.
   TRANSLATIONAL MED. 337ra64 (2016); Beth Mole, First Autonomous Robot to
   Operate on Soft Tissue Outdoes Human Surgeons, ARS TECHNICA (May 6, 2016),
   http://arstechnica.com/science/2016/05/smart-sewing-machine-nails-worlds-first-auto
   nomous-soft-tissue-surgery.
The Price of Autonomy                                                                    51


if the present path of human-computer interaction is something to
maintain.

      In theory, it would seem obvious that a robot with minuscule, nimble,
even laparoscopic probes would be a better interventionist than the
average surgeon—and perhaps, eventually, even the best ones. “We rely
on the dexterity of human surgeons but now we know machines are quite
a bit more precise than humans. If you want to do things with extreme
                                                                                         14
precision, a machine would be better,” said one Google researcher.
And if the “Smart Tissue Autonomous Robot (STAR) could sew more
evenly and consistently than even an experienced surgeon” on a pig
intestine, there is no reason in principle it could not do the same with
                15
human flesh.         However, “STAR was still dependent on a surgeon to
make the initial incision, take out the bowel, and line up the pieces”
                                  16
before it began suturing.              As leading health technology scholars
observed in a review article, it will likely be many years or decades until
                                                                             17
fully autonomous robots take on a surgery from start to finish.


14 Mark Harris, Founder of Google’s Stealthy Surgical Robotics Project Speaks, WIRED
   (Dec. 14, 2015), https://backchannel.com/founder-of-google-s-stealthy-surgical-robotics-
   project-speaks-c2f7e0dfe13c#.8brbfi1co.
15 James Vincent, A Robot Surgeon Has Passed a Major Milestone—Sewing up Pig
   Guts, THE VERGE (May 4, 2016), https://www.theverge.com/2016/5/4/11591024/robot-
   surgery-autonomous-smart-tissue-star-system/.
16 Id. The STAR system has advanced since 2016, according to a recent study, whose
   authors claim that “Although the system does require manual fine adjustment of the
   robot to correct positioning if a stitch is missed, more than 83% of the suturing task is
   completed autonomously using this workflow.” Hamed Saeidi et al., Autonomous
   Robotic Laparoscopic Surgery for Intestinal Anastomosis, 7 SCI. ROBOTICS eabj2908,
   at 2 (2022). However, it still involves a human operator, who “selects among
   autonomously suggested suture plans or approves a replanning step and monitors the
   robot for repeating a stitch as needed.” Id.
17 Drew Simshaw et al., Regulating Healthcare Robots: Maximizing Opportunities
   While Minimizing Risks, 22 RICH. J.L. & TECH. 1, 3 (2016) (“Such autonomy includes
   the supervisory control paradigm, in which certain functions are automated with a
52                                           《中研院法學期刊》第34期（2024年3月）



      Direct-to-consumer medical automation and robotics is currently
not a plausible step forward in many areas. First, scientific evidence is
often extremely difficult for the layman to interpret. Large corporations
can and often do market products in unscrupulous ways. Large
pharmaceutical firms and device manufacturers have systematically
                                                 18
skewed data to support their products.                Responsibility for harms is also
                                       19
often defused or deflected.                 Information is scattered, and those
untrained in medicine may not be able to interpret conflicting studies.
Uncomplicated medical devices, like joint replacements and screws,
have continued to be implanted in patients years after serious safety
concerns were raised. Moreover, firms may impose on individuals “hold
                                                            20
harmless” clauses, preventing future lawsuits.                   In other words, even in
a field as technical and, in principle, automatable as surgery, it is vital to


   human supervising the system, all the way to fully autonomous robots. Similarly,
   health care environments that are reliant on or dominated by all-purpose ‘healthcare
   companions’ and robotic ‘doctors,’ utilizing artificial intelligence, will raise fascinating
   questions. However, these technologies will not be available for purchase or be
   deployed in our hospitals any time soon.”).
18 Frank Pasquale, Grand Bargains for Big Data: The Emerging Law of Health
   Information, 72 MD. L. REV. 682, 689 (2013) (“This massive misallocation of
   resources may be attributed, in part, to failures to act on current data, but it also occurs
   because useful data is not available, does not exist, or is actively hidden.”); BEN
   GOLDACRE, BAD PHARMA: HOW DRUG COMPANIES MISLEAD DOCTORS AND HARM
   PATIENTS 27 (2013) (“First, as we saw in the case of reboxetine, doctors and patients
   are misled about the effects of the medicines they use, and can end up making
   decisions that cause avoidable suffering, or even death.”); see also JEANNE LENZER,
   THE DANGER WITHIN US: AMERICA’S UNTESTED, UNREGULATED MEDICAL DEVICE
   INDUSTRY AND ONE MAN’S BATTLE TO SURVIVE IT (2017).
19 Anita Bernstein, (Almost) No Bad Drugs: Near-Total Products Liability Immunity for
   Pharmaceuticals Explained, 77 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 3, 8 (2020). “Modern products
   liability identifies three categories of product defect; courts insulate drug
   manufacturers from responsibility for all three.”
20 MARGARET JANE RADIN, BOILERPLATE: THE FINE PRINT, VANISHING RIGHTS, AND THE
   RULE OF LAW 199 (2012). “In the case of a [technological protection measures
   (TPMs)], the curtailing of user rights is much more literally a part of a digital product
   than is a set of boilerplate terms that comes with a physical product or a service.”
The Price of Autonomy                                                           53


keep some person in the loop as a source of information and advice for
laypeople. MIT economist David Autor offers a general reality check
about automation that applies with even more force here:

    Most automated systems lack flexibility—they are brittle.
    Modern automobile plants, for example, employ industrial
    robots to install windshields on new vehicles as they move
    through the assembly line. But aftermarket windshield
    replacement companies employ technicians, not robots, to
    install replacement windshields. Why not robots? Because
    removing a broken windshield, preparing the windshield frame
    to accept a replacement, and fitting a replacement into that
    frame demand far more real-time adaptability than any
                                           21
    contemporary robot can approach.

     Of course, futurists can probably imagine a robot in a self-driving
car that can navigate itself to your car, drive it to a garage, and order
other robots to replace the windshield. But even that scenario depends on
a chain of contingencies and potential human interventions when things
go wrong. When the stakes are higher—for instance, replacing a kidney
instead of a windshield—then even more back-up systems and planning
will be necessary.

     To be sure, even in situations where a human health care provider is
fully in charge, there is some level of responsibility, and perhaps even
agency, in AI tools used. Bruno Latour puts the matter starkly, claiming
that “any thing that does modify a state of affairs by making a difference


21 David Autor, Polanyi’s Paradox and the Shape of Employment Growth 31 (Nat’l
   Bureau of Econ. Res. Working Paper No. 20485, 2014), http://www.nber.org/papers/
   w20485.
54                                       《中研院法學期刊》第34期（2024年3月）


               22
is an actor.”       He concedes that “it is hard to see how a hammer, a
                                                                                   23
basket, a door closer, a cat, a rug, a mug, a list, or a tag could act.”
However, as one of his more insightful reviewers observes:

      Contrary to some caricatures, actor-network approaches do not
      fight sociology by proclaiming a contrary religion in which
      objects and scallops are mysteriously endowed with agency:
      they simply refuse to ignore, a priori, large realms of activity.
      Close empirical observation—and not only ethnography,
      incidentally—may reveal that objects, animals, plants, theories,
      chemicals, texts, and people may be jostling and pushing in
      ways that escape observers who already know that the truth lies
      under the facts, in fields, class structure, etc. What is or is not
      an actor is a matter for empirical investigation; there is no
                         24
      general theory.

       A similar resistance to a totally generalized theory of tort liability is
evident in U.S. doctrine, in ways that lend some credence to actor-
network-driven approaches in law. For example, a leading case
promoting a national (rather than local) and unitary (rather than tiered)
standard of care in malpractice, also recognized a “resource-based
caveat:” a doctor in a resource-constrained setting cannot be expected to
meet a standard of care established in a more resource-supplied
        25
locale.      Thus medical equipment in such a case may be considered


22 BRUNO LATOUR, REASSEMBLING THE SOCIAL: AN INTRODUCTION TO ACTOR-NETWORK-
     THEORY 71 (2005).
23 Id.
24 Mariana Valverde, Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network Theory.
   By Bruno Latour, 41 LAW & SOC’Y REV. 744, 745 (2007) (reviewing BRUNO LATOUR,
   REASSEMBLING THE SOCIAL: AN INTRODUCTION TO ACTOR-NETWORK-THEORY (2005)).
25 Hall v. Hilbun, 466 So.2d 856 (1985).
The Price of Autonomy                                                                55


something of an actant in the court’s conceptualization of medical
responsibility. Similarly, the development of theories of enterprise
liability in health care indicate a level of responsibility for outcomes to a
non-human “person,” the corporation. Nevertheless, the distinction
between a (still-putative) robotic surgeon, and a robotic tool operated by
a person, is clear. Even if the tool acquires sophisticated sensing and
clinical decision support capabilities, it is ultimately aiding a person in a
task, rather than completing the task itself.

      Even profit-minded robotics manufacturers may want to keep
human beings “in the loop”—both to assure better use of their products,
and to deflect liability. Legal reform will be needed to avoid
opportunism built around excessively deflective doctrines. If something
goes wrong with a mechanical system—be it an autopilot on a plane or a
device used in surgery—doctrines of “competent human intervention,”
“the learned intermediary,” or “captain of the ship” have tended to shift
liability to the person operating (or merely capable of taking control
                                                               26
from) the device, rather than the device maker.                     But even when
robotics and AI only complement a professional, there still need to be
opportunities for plaintiffs and courts to discover whether the
technology’s developers and vendors acted reasonably. Such inquiry is
                                                                                27
endangered by expansive interpretations of the above doctrines.                      As


26 Madeleine Elish & Tim Hwang, Praise the Machine! Punish the Human! The
   Contradictory History of Accountability in Automated Aviation 7, 21 (Data & Soc’y
   Res. Inst. Working Paper No. 1, 2015) (on captain of the ship and the learned
   intermediary respectively); Sharona Hoffman & Andy Podgurski, Finding a Cure:
   The Case for Regulation and Oversight of Electronic Health Record Systems, 22
   HARV. J.L. & TECH. 103, 133 (2008) (on competent human intervention).
27 The learned intermediary doctrine holds that the manufacturer of a new technology
   “discharges their duty of care to consumers by providing adequate warnings” about its
   potential for harm to professionals using the technology. James Nelson, Arizona High
56                                        《中研院法學期刊》第34期（2024年3月）



the example of the tendon-cutting device showed, all responsibility for
an error should not rest on a doctor when complementary robotics fails
to accomplish what it promised to do. To hold otherwise would again be
                                                                    28
an open invitation to technologists to rest on their laurels.

      Even if technologists develop fully autonomous robot surgeons, the
ultimate “backup system” would be a skilled human surgeon with some
                                            29
experience, flexibility, and creativity.         Our aim should not be to replace
such individuals, but to aid in their efficiency and effectiveness. The
sequence and shape of automation in health care cannot simply be
dictated from on high by engineers. Rather, domain experts need to be
consulted, and they need to buy into a larger vision of progress in their
field. Perhaps more of medicine should indeed be automated—but law
should help ensure that physicians themselves are lasting partners in that
process. They should be helped, not replaced, by machines, for the short
to medium term.

      Of course, in the long term, new arrangements may arise. The
distinction between complementary and substitutive robotics may
become more a difference of degree rather than kind in some routinized
aspects of medical practice. The right tools make a job easier—and at



   Court Reestablishes the “Learned Intermediary” Doctrine, A.B.A. (Feb. 25, 2016),
   https://www.americanbar.org/groups/litigation/committees/mass-torts/practice/2016/
   learned-intermediary-doctrine.
28 Aaron S. Kesselheim, Permitting Product Liability Litigation for FDA-Approved
   Drugs and Devices Promotes Patient Safety, 87 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY &
   THERAPEUTICS 645, 645 (2010). Note that both physicians and technologists may
   share responsibility for preventable errors. The amount of compensation in both
   negligence and strict liability regimes may be limited by state legislatures to avoid
   over-deterring innovation. But compensation is still due.
29 NICHOLAS CARR, THE GLASS CAGE: HOW OUR COMPUTERS ARE CHANGING US 155
   (2015).
The Price of Autonomy                                                              57


times even more engaging. An analogy from the use of technology in
driving is useful. A truck driver may find that cruise control frees his
foot from the gas pedal. Automatic transmission makes it easier to shift
from high to low gear. Collision avoidance software can warn him about
                           30
cars in his blind spot.         Technology can make the job much easier—
until it replaces the driver altogether. So, there is delicate balance
between inventions that help workers and those which replace them
altogether. Economists tend to call the former “complementary” to labor,
and the latter “substitutive.”

     The “be careful what you wish for” story of a worker gradually
replaced by his tools has a long history. Aristotle speculated about the
effects of self-driving looms centuries before they transformed
                  31
manufacturing.         Hegel tells the story of a master who gradually
becomes weaker and less competent in comparison with a slave whom
he forces to perform ever more tasks. Labor economists have worried
that “deskilling” is the natural consequence of a more mechanized
                                                          32
workplace, paving the way to mass automation.

     However, a smooth transition from “being helped” to “being
replaced” by technology is not an inevitability. Nor should it be in



30 Karen E. C. Levy, The Contexts of Control: Information, Power, and Truck-Driving
   Work, 31 INFO. SOC’Y 160, 166 (2015); NAT’L HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMIN.,
   ACCELERATING THE NEXT REVOLUTION IN ROADWAY SAFETY 2-3 (2016), https://www.
   transportation.gov/sites/dot.gov/files/docs/DOT_AV_Policy.pdf.
31 ARISTOTLE, POLITICS 1-18 (Benjamin Jowett trans., Indo-European Publishing 2012)
   (350 B.C.E.) (if “shuttles wove and picks played kitharas [stringed instruments] by
   themselves, master-craftsmen would have no need of assistants and masters no need
   of slaves.”).
32 HARRY BRAVERMAN, LABOR AND MONOPOLY CAPITAL: THE DEGRADATION OF WORK
   IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY, at xiii (1974); CLAUDIA GOLDIN & LAWRENCE F. KATZ,
   THE RACE BETWEEN EDUCATION AND TECHNOLOGY 2 (2008).
58                                          《中研院法學期刊》第34期（2024年3月）



medicine. While fields like driving have a relatively simple goal (getting
to a destination as quickly and safely as possible), much of medicine
entails difficult and subtle trade-offs. There is a much better case for
aspiring to build drivers’ skills into autonomous vehicles, than trying to
                                       33
do the same for physicians.                 Whereas the relevant data about
autonomous cars will be relatively transparent to potential buyers,
performance data for autonomous medical equipment is likely to be
                                  34
more opaque and contested.             For that reason alone, keeping a “human
in the loop” is critical. When there are complicated value judgments at
stake (for example, whether to try a riskier or experimental knee surgery
in order to try to increase the patient’s ability to run afterwards), there
are all manner of trade-offs that demand a skilled and experienced
domain expert’s attention.



III. Strict Liability for Substitutive Automation

      Insurance contracts, licensure, and certification rules have a
                                                                  35
powerful impact on technological development.                          There is no
autonomous robotic surgeon today—only “robotically assistive surgical
devices.” Even if some genius were to invent a fully autonomous
surgical machine, it would need to be vetted by years of tests and

33 Moreover, even in the realm of driving, some firms are focused on keeping human
   beings in the picture. For example, Toyota has promoted cars with a spectrum of
   machine involvement, from chauffeur mode (which requires minimal monitoring by a
   driver) to guardian mode (which focuses the car’s computing systems on accident
   avoidance, while a person helms the vehicle). Planes have had autopilot capacities for
   decades, but commercial carriers still tend to have at least two persons at the helm.
34 GOLDACRE, supra note 18, at 12.
35 Meghan Hamilton-Piercy, Cybersurgery: Why the United States Should Embrace This
   Emerging Technology, 7 J. HIGH TECH. L. 203, 216 (2007).
The Price of Autonomy                                                                 59


                                                   36
research before mass adoption occurred.                 Reimbursement rules may
create another hurdle for rapid adoption of robotics. When robots
generate marginally better outcomes, public and private insurers will
think twice about paying high fees to guarantee access to them.

     Liability concerns will also slow the development of autonomous
systems. For example, anesthesia may seem like the ideal use case for an
autonomous robot, since machine-readable reports of bodily states may,
in principle, be able to indicate any untoward development meriting an
intervention. However, the field still seems to be focused on assistive
models. The Sedasys anesthesia machine, for instance, was licensed by
the FDA to assist anesthesiologists in relatively straightforward
              37
operations.         It could monitor patients’ breathing and heart rate,
administer set doses of anesthesia, and alter those doses in response to
            38
new data.          Like the “guardian” mode of cars, designed to prevent
accidents, Sedasys robots could spot warning signs of adverse events in
advance of their actually occurring.

     The FDA observed that Sedasys’s technology might lay the
foundations for higher levels of technological intervention in
anesthesiology:



36 Margo Goldberg, The Robotic Arm Went Crazy! The Problem of Establishing Liability
   in A Monopolized Field, 38 RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECH. L.J. 225, 250 (2012).
37 U.S. FOOD & DRUG ADMIN., SUMMARY OF SAFETY AND EFFECTIVENESS DATA (SSED)
   38 (2013), https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/cdrh_docs/pdf8/p080009b.pdf.
38 PAUL G. BARASH ET AL., CLINICAL ANESTHESIA 1291 (8th ed. 2017) (“In May 2013,
   the FDA approved Sedasys, a computer-assisted patient-controlled sedation system
   that administers propofol for colonoscopies/endoscopies. Patients are monitored with
   electrocardiography, pulse oximetry, noninvasive blood pressure monitoring, and end-
   tidal carbon dioxide. Sedation is also further monitored via an earpiece through which
   the computer tells the patient to squeeze a handset. Based on these parameters,
   Sedasys will algorithmically adjust the infusion rate of propofol.”).
60                                       《中研院法學期刊》第34期（2024年3月）



      The approval of the SEDASYS System represents a notable
      advancement in the field of semi-autonomous control of drug
      administration in medicine. The device utilizes negative
      feedback from specialized physiological monitors to assess and
      limit drug dosing and thereby control the depth of sedation. The
      principle of negative feedback control may be applicable to a
      variety of drugs and clinical scenarios different from those
                                                  39
      associated with sedation management.

       However, the agency also stated that “the use of the device is
restricted to settings where a practitioner trained in the administration of
general anesthesia is immediately available to the user for assistance or
consultation as needed. Immediate availability in this context means that
an anesthesia professional will be available on site to respond to an
                            40
emergency situation.”            This type of safeguard both reflects and
complicates the larger argument of this article that human control or
monitoring should be required no matter how autonomous the robotic
system. While the core case of complementarity is a physician directly
operating or supervising the relevant medical AI and robotics, a
secondary application of the concept may include a physician (here, an
anesthesiologist) maintaining presence in case of complications, or
                                                41
taking over upon notice of complications.

       There are many possible future developments for such anesthesia
technology. In Europe, national health authorities will be pulled in
opposing directions. Health cost cutters may favor full robotization as a


39 U.S. FOOD & DRUG ADMIN., supra note 37, at 37.
40 Id. at 38.
41 BARASH ET AL., supra note 38, at 1291; Basavana G. Goudra & Preet M. Singh,
     SEDASYS, Sedation, and the Unknown, 26 J. CLINICAL ANESTHESIA 334, 335 (2014).
The Price of Autonomy                                                                 61


cost-cutting measure. On the other hand, European workers have, in
general, been able to play a larger role in the deployment of technology
than their American peers. That trend would encourage a slow roll-out of
the devices, as they gradually proved their worth, and health care
workers (including anesthesiologists and nurse-anesthetists) transitioned
toward positions monitoring and improving the machines—or migrated
toward jobs still requiring the “human touch.”

      In the US, there are also conflicting political and economic currents.
In the country with the highest health care expenditures on the planet,
costs are always a concern. But risk-averse hospitals may only permit
patients to opt for cheaper, robotic anesthesiology if they waive liability,
promising not to sue the hospital if something goes wrong—and may
                                                       42
ultimately find such a waiver unenforceable.                The dubious legal status
of such waivers in the past has cast a long shadow over advocacy of
                                                                     43
“consumer directed health care” in the United States.                     While some
doctors wanted to give patients the option of “last year’s medicine at last
year’s prices,” they did not want to be sued for malpractice if the cheaper
option proved ineffective. Similar concerns will arise as device makers
market robotic systems for hospitals and doctors’ offices.



42 For an influential discussion of general waivers of liability in a medial context, see
   Tunkl v. Regents of the Univ. of Cal., 383 P.2d 441 (Cal. 1963) (disallowing waivers
   of liability); but see Colton v. N.Y. Hosp., 414 N.Y.S.2d 866 (1979) (upholding
   exculpatory clause in a case where an experimental treatment was the only option for
   the patient).
43 Matthew J.B. Lawrence, In Search of an Enforceable Medical Malpractice
   Exculpatory Agreement: Introducing Confidential Contracts as a Solution to the
   Doctor-Patient Relationship Problem, 84 N.Y.U. L. REV. 850, 856 n.20 (2009) (noting
   that “courts typically disfavor exculpatory agreements in the healthcare context,” in
   the context of a larger examination of scholarly efforts to advocate for a different
   approach with respect to consumer-directed health care.).
62                                            《中研院法學期刊》第34期（2024年3月）



      Assume, for now, that such disclaimers and exculpatory clauses
prove ineffective. What would be the proper liability regime for a fully
autonomous anesthesia machine? Assume for purposes of this article that
the machine’s operations were not explicable to the surgeons and other
medical personnel among whom it was deployed—so that there is no
                                                                                 44
sense in which it could be considered merely “helping” them.                          What is
the proper way to the responsibility of designers, manufacturers, vendors,
and users of such a machine for preventable adverse outcomes?

      In a jurisdiction where human anesthesiologists are widely
available, strict liability may turn out to be a compelling approach with
respect to designers, given compelling scholarship on other, similar
                        45
design scenarios.            A negligence regime risks undermining proper
                               46
levels of accountability.           Consider, for instance, a machine that fails to


44 On the critical distinction between explainable and non-explainable AI in medical
   automation and robotics, see Barbara J. Evans & Frank Pasquale, Product Liability
   Suits for FDA-Regulated AI/ML Software, in THE FUTURE OF MEDICAL DEVICE
   REGULATION: INNOVATION AND PROTECTION 22, 26-27 (I. Glenn Cohen et al. eds.,
   2022).
45 For an example of such scholarship, see Eric Lindenfeld, 3D Printing of Medical
   Devices: CAD Designers as the Most Realistic Target for Strict, Product Liability
   Lawsuits, 85 UMKC L. REV. 79, 98-100 (2016). Lindenfeld argues that “[s]trict
   [l]iability for CAD [d]esigners [w]ould [n]ot be a [b]ig [l]eap for the [c]courts.” Id. at 98.
   One reason for this is that “while most courts refrain from finding architects and
   engineers strictly liable, there is at least some authority which suggests that those
   engaged in design related services could be considered ‘sellers’ as opposed to ‘service
   providers’ under the Second Restatement.” Id. at 99.
46 Joseph L. Reutiman, Defective Information: Should Information Be a “Product”
   Subject to Products Liability Claims?, 22 CORNELL J.L. & PUB. POL’Y 181, 187 (2012)
   (“Proving negligence can be an impossible proposition in certain cases where
   evidence has been destroyed because of the product defect itself or misfeasance on the
   part of the defendant and can potentially result in the complete denial of recovery.”).
   There are also many troubling ways to shift blame in the complex relationships
   between medical professionals, hospitals, vendors of AI, and others in the distribution
   chain—particularly given “hold harmless” clauses or other exculpatory contract terms
   that may be foisted on providers. Frank Pasquale, Six Horsemen of Irresponsibility, 79
The Price of Autonomy                                                                   63


include data about certain vulnerable groups. If persons in such groups
are harmed because of such a lack of data, they may not be able to
recover damages under negligence standards, since the device’s vendor
may claim (if there is adequate statistical evidence) that the device met
the standard of care for the physicians it replaced. By contrast, strict
liability requires vendors of substitutive AI and robotics to anticipate and
correct such predictable defects, and to invest in monitoring for and
anticipating less predictable errors. Note, too, that strict liability does not
require a vendor of substitutive AI to be “perfect.” Expected damages
will be balanced against expected profits. To the extent a strict liability
standard appears to be undermining valuable innovation, limits on
                                                                                        47
damages can temper the potential unfairness of liability without fault.
Just as they do with respect to malpractice exposure, insurers may offer
liability insurance to assist innovators in risk-shifting. And if the
substitutive AI has a performance record clearly as good as, or better
than, the extant standard of care (be that unaided human care, or, more
likely, human-machine cooperation), policymakers should step in to pay
damages out of the public fisc, or to provide cheap insurance against
such damages to vendors of substitutive AI and others potentially held
                                              48
liable under a strict liability standard.


   MD. L. REV. 105, 109-13 (2019) (discussing mutually reinforcing strategies of liability-
   deflection).
47 By contrast, if the extant performance standards are much better than those of
   substitutive automation, the significant damages available pursuant to strict liability
   for substitutive automation will be a critical prod toward the restoration of a unitary
   standard of care.
48 Strict liability could also transition into a no-fault compensation scheme like the US’s
   National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (NVICP), which compensates those
   who have suffered side effects from vaccinations. See, e.g., Frances E. Zollers et al.,
   No More Soft Landings for Software: Liability for Defects in an Industry That Has
   Come of Age, 21 SANTA CLARA COMPUTER & HIGH TECH. L.J. 745, 773 (2005) (“we
   favor an approach that accepts strict product liability for software and lets the case
64                                        《中研院法學期刊》第34期（2024年3月）



      However, the definition of “as good, or better” performance records
needs to be granular, so as to be sensitive to historical victims of health
disparities. There has been growing concern that the data used for
diagnostic AI may not adequately represent all groups in society. For
                                                                                      49
example, minority groups may be poorly represented in databases.
                                                            50
Women are seriously disadvantaged as well.                       Diagnostic AI that
ignores all these problems, and which still generally delivers better
results than unaided human observation, may not be actionable under a
negligence standard for those it fails to help—particularly if the standard
of care is unaided human observation. However, under a strict liability
standard, failure to include available, more representative databases, that
leads to preventable accidents, would leave vendors liable for adverse
events even if they managed to do better on average than the standard of
care. Such liability may be critical to incentivizing them to address
health disparities.

      Efthimios Parasidis has convincingly argued that courts need to
recognize and counteract automation bias—that is, the tendency of
persons to assume without proper evidence that a machine has better


   law find the point of maximum social benefit through the application of a rigorous
   cost/benefit analysis. In the rare case where a beneficial software product is being
   kept out of the market because of liability concerns and that claim is corroborated,
   there are a number of public policy strategies that can be employed in mitigation. For
   example, there is federal legislation limiting vaccine manufacturers’ liability for
   certain vaccines.”). The NVICP is funded by an excise tax on each vaccine dose.
49 See Adewole S. Adamson & Avery Smith, Machine Learning and Health Care
   Disparities in Dermatology, 154 JAMA DERMATOLOGY 1247 (2018). This lack of
   diversity also afflicts genomics research. Non-European groups tend not to be as well-
   represented in DNA databases as European groups. Alice B. Popejoy et al., The
   Clinical Imperative for Inclusivity: Race, Ethnicity, and Ancestry (REA) in Genomics,
   39 HUM. MUTATION 1713, 1717-18 (2018).
50 See CAROLINE CRIADO PEREZ, INVISIBLE WOMEN: DATA BIAS IN A WORLD DESIGNED
   FOR MEN (2019).
The Price of Autonomy                                                                   65


                             51
judgment than persons.            The problem of automation bias is recurrent
and is a persistent temptation when often-overworked professionals seek
tools to ease their workload. More stringent liability standards are a way
                                                                    52
of gradually ensuring a lower risk level in the industry.

      A vehicle manufacturer may be held responsible for an accident if
the manufacturer failed to design or manufacture the vehicle properly.
Similarly, AI and robotics may be designed or developed in a way that
fails to conform to basic standards of safety and reliability. The product
                                                                                        53
analogy increases accountability for safety, reliability, and security.
Unpredictability of advanced AI systems means that forms of
accountability reflecting classic legal standards are critical. For example,
those keeping particularly vicious or wild animals (like lions and tigers)



51 See Efthimios Parasidis, Clinical Decision Support: Elements of a Sensible Legal
   Framework, 20 J. HEALTH CARE L. & POL’Y 183, 225 (2018) (“As to the coding phase
   of software development, a strong argument can be made that coding should be
   encompassed under the category of manufacturing defects [and this is critical because
   U.S. courts typically employ strict or product liability analysis for manufacturing
   defects]… [A]llowing products liability claims for CDS systems also may be a way to
   counter disclaimers of liability that typically are found in CDS contracts.”) See also
   Kevin R. Pinkney, Putting Blame Where Blame is Due: Software Manufacturer and
   Customer Liability for Security-Related Software Failure, 13 ALB. L.J. SCI. & TECH.
   43, 51-62 (2002) (focusing on security-related failures); Michael D. Scott, Tort
   Liability for Vendors of Insecure Software: Has the Time Finally Come?, 67 MD. L.
   REV. 425, 469-70 (2008).
52 Zollers et al., supra note 48, at 768-73.
53 However, as Jamil Ammar warns, “From the perspective of product liability, courts in
   the U.S. consider computer software to be a service rather than a product. To date,
   courts have been reluctant to extend theories of product liability to software.” Jamil
   Ammar, Defective Computer-Aided Design Software Liability in 3D Bioprinted
   Human Organ Equivalents, 35 SANTA CLARA HIGH TECH. L.J. 37, 40 (2019). One
   purpose of this article is to urge courts (both in the U.S. and elsewhere) to reconsider
   this approach in the context of substitutive AI in medicine, particularly given its
   integration of software into complex sociotechnical apparatuses that include persons,
   hardware, and data.
66                                            《中研院法學期刊》第34期（2024年3月）


                                                                             54
are strictly liable if these beasts escape and cause harm.                        Enterprise
liability “asserts that actors should bear the costs of those accidents that
are characteristic of their activities and then distribute those costs among
                                                                                            55
all those who benefit from the imposition of the risks at issue.”
Professor Danielle Keats Citron inventively applied these ideas to the
digital age by analogizing massive data holdings to early water
reservoirs which, if breached, could cause death and destruction to
                                                          56
communities immediately adjacent to them.                      Much the same could be
said of autonomous robotics or AI in critical medical situations when an
irresponsible user decides to simply let them run autonomously. When
they are marketed or developed to be used in autonomous mode, their
developers and vendors must take responsibility. AI and robotics systems
                                                 57
are ultimately attributable to humans.

       A strict liability standard will be controversial. The legal scholar
Ryan Abbott has argued that, if an autonomous vehicle is, in general,
safer than the typical human driver, only a negligence cause of action
                            58
should be available.             If accepted, such a comparison would make
negligence, rather than strict or product liability, the proper judicial


54 Animals Act 1971, c. 22, § 2(1) (Eng.); RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF TORTS: PHYS. &
     EMOT. HARM § 22 WILD ANIMALS (AM. L. INST. 2023).
55 Gregory Keating, The Theory of Enterprise Liability and Common Law Strict Liability,
     54 VAND. L. REV. 1285, 1334 (2001).
56 See Danielle Keats Citron, Reservoirs of Danger: The Evolution of Public and
     Private Law at the Dawn of the Information Age, 80 S. CAL. L. REV. 241 (2007).
57 And they should be kept that way. PASQUALE, supra note 8, at 109 (proposing a fourth
     law of robotics requiring all AI and robotics to be attributable to responsible persons).
58 Ryan Abbott, The Reasonable Computer: Disrupting the Paradigm of Tort Liability,
     86 GEO. WASH. L. REV. 1, 1 (2018) (“Under current legal frameworks, suppliers of
     computer tortfeasors are likely strictly responsible for their harms. This Article argues
     that where a supplier can show that an autonomous computer, robot, or machine is
     safer than a reasonable person, the supplier should be liable in negligence rather than
     strict liability.”).
The Price of Autonomy                                                                   67


response to errors. For Abbott, the standard of a “reasonable computer”
would then supplant that of the “reasonable person,” in judicial
considerations of the type and level of responsibility to assign. Such an
approach would help ensure that there are not undue impediments to the
development of autonomous vehicles. However, it is likely less
appropriate in the medical field, since health care providers are likely to
be far more valuable in guiding the deployment of technology, long-term,
than “guardian drivers” who have been deployed to restrain self-driving
cars when they errantly threaten to crash into a person or another vehicle.
That ongoing need for guidance and development by present, expert,
professionals counsels in favor of a strict liability standard in the case of
substitutive automation in medicine, to promote ongoing complementarity.

      There are other problematic dimensions of a “reasonable computer”
standard. As Jacob Turner argues in his book Robot Rules, a negligence
standard may be very difficult to apply here, because “[a] reasonable
human person is fairly easy to imagine. The law’s ability to set an
objective standard of behaviour takes as its starting point the idea that all
humans are similar… AI, on the other hand, is heterogeneous in nature:
there are many different techniques for creating AI and the variety is
likely only to increase in the future as new technologies are
              59
developed.”        This is a valuable reminder of the plasticity of the
                                                                 60
mechanical world, at least relative to that of humans.


59 JACOB TURNER, ROBOT RULES 90 (2019).
60 Any attribution of robot interests or rights based on analogy to humans, for instance,
   is incoherent because the very conceptions of well-being or desire that are the
   foundation of such rights and interests may be reprogrammed in the robot. Such
   “reprogramming” is, by contrast, exceptionally difficult and damaging when
   undertook with respect to a person, if it can be done at all. Given the limited advances
   made toward robotics, we must turn to fiction to see an illustration of this point. The
   television series Westworld tried to attribute something like the human fixity I have
68                                       《中研院法學期刊》第34期（2024年3月）



     It is not unreasonable for persons to expect that AIs unleashed upon
the world will have some basic rules of engagement, such as being
programmed and designed to limit human harm. This ethical principle
was articulated as the first of Isaac Asimov’s Laws of Robotics and
shows up in various forms in many other works on human-machine
             61
interaction.      Strict liability for autonomous machines and AI is one
more way to ensure that prevention of harm is prioritized.



IV. Concluding Remarks: Virtues of a Mixed
    Negligence-Strict Liability Regime

     While promoting AI as a substitute for competent medical personnel,
some firms will fail to engage in the quality control and other steps
necessary to avoid disastrous outcomes. Tort lawsuits will follow, with
plaintiffs demanding damages for the firms’ failures to meet the relevant
standard of care. Legislators and courts will need to develop approaches
to liability adequate to the new technological environment. As they do so,
they will effectively set nuanced and contextualized standards for the
deployment of AI. Distinguishing between complementary and
substitutive AI is one conceptual tool that will help them do so.




   described in its episodes featuring the mental breakdown of the robot Teddy after he
   was reprogrammed to be hard-hearted and violent by the series’ protagonist, Delores.
   However, the depiction is unconvincing because the original programming connecting
   breakdown to personality trait discordance could itself have been reprogrammed.
61 See ISAAC ASIMOV, I, ROBOT (1950); Colin P.A. Jones, Robot Rights: From Asimov to
   Tezuka, JAPAN TIMES (Mar. 6, 2019), https://www.japantimes.co.jp/community/2019/
   03/06/issues/robot-rights-asimov-tezuka.
The Price of Autonomy                                                            69


     When AI or robotics simply assist a professional, they are tools. In
medicine, the doctrine of “competent human intervention” has shifted
liability away from those who make devices and toward the
professionals who use them. However, the professional in such scenarios
should not bear the entire burden of responsibility. His or her tools can
be produced well or badly, and vendors of defective, complementary AI
and robotics should be held responsible for negligence. Both legislators
and courts will need to develop standards of care designed to incentivize
proper safety, security, and risk avoidance. But the burden of proof will
be on the plaintiff to demonstrate that not only a skilled medical
professional, but also the maker of the tools used by such a professional,
should be held liable for a preventable adverse outcome.

     When AI and robotics replace a skilled medical professional, the
burden shifts. The vendor of such computational systems needs to take
on the responsibility for errors and accidents. At the damages phase of
litigation, the vendor may explain how its damages should be mitigated
based on its AI’s performance relative to the extant human or human-
machine based standard of care. Such responsibility for explanation will
serve an important information-forcing function in areas where public
                                                      62
understanding is often limited by trade secrecy.

     Accountability is a contested and complex concept in tort law. It is
all too easy to reduce the problem of preventable adverse events in
medicine as a simple matter of providers’ responsibility to patients.
However, a broader political economy perspective goes beyond the dyad


62 For another example of information-forcing regulation, see Frank Pasquale, Ending
   the Specialty Hospital Wars: A Plea for Pilot Programs as Information-Forcing
   Regulatory Design, in THE FRAGMENTATION OF U.S. HEALTH CARE: CAUSES AND
   SOLUTIONS 235 (Einer Elhauge ed., 2010).
70                                         《中研院法學期刊》第34期（2024年3月）



of provider-patient, incorporating larger concerns about the nature of the
labor force, the explainability of AI, and the power of dominant
                      63
technology firms.          As AI and robotics take on more roles, there will be
cost pressures for technology to prematurely replace providers. Strict or
enterprise liability for such adverse events arising out of particular
replacements will generally help deter its happening too quickly. By
ensuring that vendors of medical AI and robotics are more accountable
to those whom they harm, administrative agencies and courts may renew
an ongoing quality movement within the profession of medicine. They
may even spark the professionalization of AI research itself, since
professions are institutions of accountability that help assure ongoing
self-review and improvement. And if there are concerns about liability
over-deterring innovation, damages caps may be imposed to calibrate
incentives accordingly.

       From an individualistic, utilitarian perspective (dominant in
mainstream economics), substitutive automation of machines to replace
humans in many fields seems to be a foregone conclusion, thanks to a set
of interlinked value judgments about the value of cheapening tasks. But
within a profession like medicine, matters are more complicated. A
renewed political economy of automation demands a role for



63 On the critical distinction between explainable and non-explainable AI in medical
     automation and robotics, see Evans & Pasquale, supra note 44, at 26-27. (“To use
     engineering parlance, the FDA can regulate AI/ML CDS software if it is not intended
     to function as explainable artificial intelligence. CDS software that makes
     recommendations falls under the FDA’s regulatory jurisdiction if those
     recommendations are not intended to be transparent to the health care professionals
     using the software. On the other hand, if CDS software is transparent enough that a
     healthcare professional would be able to understand its recommendations and
     challenge them—that is, when it is not a black box—then Congress excludes it from
     FDA regulatory oversight.”)
The Price of Autonomy                                                              71


professionals to mediate between patients and complex technologies.
Professionals enjoy forms of autonomy, and are burdened by constraints,
rare in non-professional fields. Professionals are charged with protecting
distinct, non-economic values that society has deemed desirable. Their
labor, in turn, reflects, reproduces, and is enriched by those values.
                                                                     64
Knowledge, skill, and ethics are inextricably intertwined.                In the face
of well-hyped automation, professionals ought to reaffirm their own
norms. The threat of tort liability for the firms they work for (including
AI vendors) gives them some leverage to push back against management
demands for premature automation. Indeed, when Marc Law and
Sukkoo Kim examined the history of professionalization and
occupational licensure, they found patterns of worker self-organization
in the United States in the early 20th century that substantially increased
                        65
consumer protection.         By deterring premature substitutive automation,
a liability regime that reduces potential exposure of AI vendors when
they complement (rather than substitute for) medical professionals will
help ensure a democratization of expertise, including ongoing critical
evaluation of medical AI and robotics by physicians and other providers.

     Of course, as courts develop such evolving standards of care, they
will also face predictable efforts by owners of AI to deflect liability. For
example, firms may require their customers or users to sign exculpatory
clauses and other contractual limitations on liability by waiving their



64 See Frank Paquale, Synergy and Tradition: The Unity of Research, Service, and
   Teaching in Legal Education, 40 J. LEGAL PROF. 25 (2015).
65 Marc T. Law & Sukkoo Kim, Specialization and Regulation: The Rise of
   Professionals and the Emergence of Occupational Licensing Regulation, 65 J. ECON.
   HIST. 723, 725 (2005) (“Thus, professionals may choose to self regulate, or
   professionals and consumers may seek government regulation to eliminate charlatans,
   incompetents or frauds and protect the safety and welfare of consumers.”).
72                                        《中研院法學期刊》第34期（2024年3月）



right to sue. Asymmetries of power are important here. For example, in
medicine, many courts have resisted exculpatory clauses purporting to
relieve physicians of responsibility for malpractice, thanks in part to the
                                                                66
asymmetrical power of hospitals and their patients.                  They should be
similarly wary in AI-intensive scenarios, where even greater imbalances
of power and knowledge are common.

      Policymakers are currently struggling to keep pace with the speed
of technological development. Legislators have been hesitant to pass
broad statutes, as they are fearful of inhibiting growth and innovation in
the space. However, increasingly there is public demand for policy
                                                                            67
interventions and protections regarding critical technology.                     These
demands do not necessarily impede economic or technological
advancement. Some fields may never get traction if customers cannot be
assured that someone will be held accountable if an AI fails.
Developing appropriate standards of responsibility along the lines
prescribed in this article should advance the quality of both artificial
intelligence (AI) and intelligence augmentation (IA).




66 Nadia N. Sawicki, Choosing Medical Malpractice, 93 WASH. L. REV. 891, 893 (2018)
   (“most courts do ultimately reject defenses based on contract or assumption of risk in
   medical malpractice cases,” though “they often do so only after carefully examining
   the characteristics of the patient’s acceptance—an adjudicative approach that is
   inconsistent with a categorical bar.”).
67 Nathalie A. Smuha, From a “Race to AI” to a “Race to AI Regulation”: Regulatory
   Competition for Artificial Intelligence, 13 LAW, INNOVATION & TECH. 57, 59, 71 (2021)
   (“In fact, all over the world, regulators at regional, national, international and
   supranational level have started assessing the desirability and necessity of new or
   revised regulatory measures to minimise AI’s adverse impacts, while at the same time
   maximising its benefits”).
The Price of Autonomy                                                  73




                             References

Abbott, Ryan. 2018. The Reasonable Computer: Disrupting the Paradigm
     of Tort Liability. George Washington Law Review 86:1-45.
Adamson, Adewole S., and Avery Smith. 2018. Machine Learning and
     Health Care Disparities in Dermatology. Journal of the American
     Medical Association Dermatology 154:1247-1248.
Ammar, Jamil. 2019. Defective Computer-Aided Design Software
     Liability in 3D Bioprinted Human Organ Equivalents. Santa Clara
     High Technology Law Journal 35:37-67.
Aristotle. 2012 (350 B.C.E.). Politics, translated by Benjamin Jowett.
     Los Angeles, CA: Indo-European Publishing.
Asimov, Isaac. 1950. I, Robot. New York, NY: Gnome Press.
Autor, David. 2014. Polanyi’s Paradox and the Shape of Employment
     Growth. Working Paper No. 20485. National Bureau of Economic
     Research, Cambridge, MA. Available at http://www.nber.org/
     papers/w20485.
Barash, Paul G., Bruce F. Cullen, Robert K. Stoelting, Michael K.
     Cahalan, M. Christine Stock, Rafael Ortega, Sam R. Sharar, and
     Natalie F. Holt. 2017. Clinical Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
     Wolters Kluwer.
Bernstein, Anita. 2020. (Almost) No Bad Drugs: Near-Total Products
     Liability Immunity for Pharmaceuticals Explained. Washington and
     Lee Law Review 77:3-96.
Blake, Valarie K. 2020. Regulating Care Robots. Temple Law Review
     92:551-594.
74                                《中研院法學期刊》第34期（2024年3月）



Braverman, Harry. 1974. Labor and Monopoly Capital: The
     Degradation of Work in the Twentieth Century. New York, NY:
     Monthly Review Press.
Carr, Nicholas. 2015. The Glass Cage: How Our Computers Are
     Changing Us. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company.
Chin, Andrew. 2017. Surgically Precise but Kinematically Abstract
     Patents. Houston Law Review 55:267-319.
Citron, Danielle Keats. 2007. Reservoirs of Danger: The Evolution of
     Public and Private Law at the Dawn of the Information Age.
     Southern California Law Review 80:241-297.
Elish, Madeleine, and Tim Hwang. 2015. Praise the Machine! Punish the
     Human! The Contradictory History of Accountability in Automated
     Aviation. Working Paper No. 1. Data & Society Research Institute,
     New York, NY.
Evans, Barbara J., and Frank Pasquale. 2022. Product Liability Suits for
     FDA-Regulated AI/ML Software. Pp. 22-35 in The Future of
     Medical Device Regulation: Innovation and Protection, edited by I.
     Glenn Cohen, Timo Minssen, W. Nicholson Price, II, Christopher
     Robertson and Carmel Shachar. New York, NY: Cambridge
     University Press.
Goldacre, Ben. 2013. Bad Pharma: How Drug Companies Mislead
     Doctors and Harm Patients. London: Fourth Estate.
Goldberg, Margo. 2012. The Robotic Arm Went Crazy! The Problem of
     Establishing Liability in A Monopolized Field. Rutgers Computer
     & Technology Law Journal 38:225-253.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race Between
     Education and Technology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
     Press.
The Price of Autonomy                                                75


Goudra, Basavana G., and Preet M. Singh. 2014. SEDASYS, Sedation,
     and the Unknown. Journal of Clinical Anesthesia 26:334-336.
Hamilton-Piercy, Meghan. 2007. Cybersurgery: Why the United States
     Should Embrace This Emerging Technology. Journal of High
     Technology Law 7:203-226.
Hoffman, Sharona, and Andy Podgurski. 2008. Finding a Cure: The
     Case for Regulation and Oversight of Electronic Health Record
     Systems. Harvard Journal of Law & Technology 22:103-165.
Keating, Gregory. 2001. The Theory of Enterprise Liability and Common
     Law Strict Liability. Vanderbilt Law Review 54:1285-1335.
Kesselheim, Aaron S. 2010. Permitting Product Liability Litigation for
     FDA-Approved Drugs and Devices Promotes Patient Safety.
     Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics 87:645-647.
Latour, Bruno. 2005. Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-
     Network-Theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Law, Marc T., and Sukkoo Kim. 2005. Specialization and Regulation:
     The Rise of Professionals and the Emergence of Occupational
     Licensing Regulation. Journal of Economy History 65:723-756.
Lawrence, Matthew J.B. 2009. In Search of an Enforceable Medical
     Malpractice Exculpatory Agreement: Introducing Confidential
     Contracts as a Solution to the Doctor-Patient Relationship Problem.
     New York University Law Review 84:850-879.
Lenzer, Jeanne. 2017. The Danger Within Us: America’s Untested,
     Unregulated Medical Device Industry and One Man’s Battle to
     Survive It. New York, NY: Little, Brown and Company.
Levy, Karen E.C. 2016. The Contexts of Control: Information, Power,
     and Truck-Driving Work. The Information Society 31:160-174.
76                                 《中研院法學期刊》第34期（2024年3月）



Lindenfeld, Eric. 2016. 3D Printing of Medical Devices: CAD Designers
     as the Most Realistic Target for Strict, Product Liability Lawsuits.
     University of Missouri-Kansas City Law Review 85:79-103.
McCluskey, Martha T., Frank Pasquale, and Jennifer Taub. 2016. Law
     and Economics: Contemporary Approaches. Yale Law and Policy
     Review 35:297-308.
Novara, Giacomo, Vincenzo Ficarra, Raymond C. Rosen, Walter
     Artibani, Anthony Costello, James A. Eastham, Markus Graefen,
     Giorgio Guazzoni, Shahrokh F. Shariat, Jens-Uwe Stolzenburg,
     Hendrik Van Poppel, Filiberto Zattoni, Francesco Montorsi,
     Alexandre Mottrie, and Timothy G. Wilson. 2012. Systematic
     Review and Meta-analysis of Perioperative Outcomes and
     Complications    After   Robot-assisted   Radical    Prostatectomy.
     European Urology 62:431-452.
Parasidis, Efthimios. 2018. Clinical Decision Support: Elements of a
     Sensible Legal Framework. Journal of Health Care Law and Policy
     20:183-228.
Pasquale, Frank. 2010. Access to Medicine in an Era of Fractal
     Inequality. Annals of Health Law 19:269-310.
─. 2010. Ending the Specialty Hospital Wars: A Plea for Pilot
     Programs as Information-Forcing Regulatory Design. Pp. 235-278
     in The Fragmentation of U.S. Health Care: Causes and Solutions,
     edited by Einer Elhauge. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
─. 2013. Grand Bargains for Big Data: The Emerging Law of
     Health Information. Maryland Law Review 72:682-772.
─. 2015. Synergy and Tradition: The Unity of Research, Service,
     and Teaching in Legal Education. Journal of the Legal Profession
     40:25-49.
The Price of Autonomy                                                   77


─. 2019. Six Horsemen of Irresponsibility. Maryland Law Review
     79:105-113.
─. 2020. New Laws of Robotics: Defending Human Expertise in
     the Age of AI. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Perez, Caroline Criado. 2019. Invisible Women: Data Bias in a World
     Designed for Men. New York, NY: Abrams Press.
Pinkney, Kevin R. 2002. Putting Blame Where Blame Is Due: Software
     Manufacturer and Customer Liability for Security-Related Software
     Failure. Albany Law Journal of Science and Technology 13:43-82.
Popejoy, Alice B., Deborah I. Ritter, Kristy Crooks, Erin Currey,
     Stephanie M. Fullerton, Lucia A. Hindorff, Barbara Koenig, Erin M.
     Ramos, Elena P. Sorokin, Hannah Wand, Mathew W. Wright, James
     Zou, Christopher R. Gignoux, Vence L. Bonham, Sharon E. Plon,
     Carlos D. Bustamante, and Clinical Genome Resource (ClinGen),
     Ancestry and Diversity Working Group (ADWG). 2018. The
     Clinical Imperative for Inclusivity: Race, Ethnicity, and Ancestry
     (REA) in Genomics. Human Mutation 39:1713-1720.
Price, W. Nicholson, II, Sara Gerke, and I. Glenn Cohen. 2019. Potential
     Liability for Physicians Using Artificial Intelligence. The Journal of
     the American Medical Association 322:1765-1766.
Radin, Margaret Jane. 2012. Boilerplate: The Fine Print, Vanishing
     Rights, and the Rule of Law. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
     Press.
Reutiman, Joseph L. 2012. Defective Information: Should Information
     Be a “Product” Subject to Products Liability Claims?. Cornell
     Journal of Law and Public Policy 22:181-203.
Saeidi, Hamed, Justin D. Opfermann, Michael Kam, Shuwen Wei,
     Simon Leonard, Michael H. Hsieh, Jin U. Kang, and Axel Krieger.
78                                《中研院法學期刊》第34期（2024年3月）



     2022. Autonomous Robotic Laparoscopic Surgery for Intestinal
     Anastomosis. Science Robotics 7:eabj2908.
Sawicki, Nadia N. 2018. Choosing Medical Malpractice. Washington
     Law Review 93:891-966.
Scott, Michael D. 2008. Tort Liability for Vendors of Insecure Software:
     Has the Time Finally Come?. Maryland Law Review 67:425-484.
Shademan, Azad, Ryan S. Decker, Justin D. Opfermann, Simon Leonard,
     Axel Krieger, and Peter C. W. Kim. 2016. Supervised Autonomous
     Robotic Soft Tissue Surgery. Science Translational Medicine 8:
     337ra64.
Simshaw, Drew, Nicolas Terry, Kris Hauser, and M.L. Cummings. 2016.
     Regulating Healthcare Robots: Maximizing Opportunities While
     Minimizing Risks. Richmond Journal of Law & Technology 22:1-
     38.
Smuha, Nathalie A. 2021. From a “Race to AI” to a “Race to AI
     Regulation”: Regulatory Competition for Artificial Intelligence.
     Law, Innovation and Technology 13:57-84.
Turner, Jacob. 2019. Robot Rules. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Valverde, Mariana. 2007. Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to
     Actor-Network Theory. By Bruno Latour (book review). Law and
     Society Review 41:744-746.
Wachter, Robert. 2015. The Digital Doctor: Hope, Hype, and Harm at
     the Dawn of Medicine’s Computer Age. New York, NY: McGraw-
     Hill.
Zollers, Frances E., Andrew McMullin, Sandra N. Hurd, and Peter
     Shears. 2005. No More Soft Landings for Software: Liability for
     Defects in an Industry That Has Come of Age. Santa Clara
     Computer and High Technology Law Journal 21:745-782.
The Price of Autonomy                    79




                        自主權的代價
   — 輔助性與替代性醫療機器人和人工智慧技術的
           侵權責任標準

                        Frank Pasquale


                            摘要
  在醫療領域，當人工智慧或機器人技術僅為專業人士提供工具
性協助時，「有效的人為介入原則」傾向於將侵權責任從設備製造
供應商轉移到操作設備之專業人員身上。然而，專業人員在此種情
況下不應承擔所有責任。工具可能帶有瑕疵，而販售有瑕疵的輔助
性人工智慧及機器人技術的製造供應商則應對其過失負責。此時原
告則仍應舉證，證明專業醫事人員及提供工具的製造商，應對本可
防免的負面結果負有賠償責任。

  相對地，當人工智慧和機器人技術取代、而非只輔助醫事專業
人員時，此類計算系統的供應商，則須對失誤和事故擔負更多責
任。醫療領域對專業人士監督先進技術運用有既存標準。一旦醫療
自動化完全替代真人操作，避開專業人員的人為監督，從而危及患
者時，即對患者構成有瑕疵且不合理的危險。不過在損害賠償之訴
中，替代性人工智慧技術的製造供應商，應得以人工智慧之表現，
相對於現有人為或人機的照護標準，來解釋應如何減輕其賠償金
額。此種解釋責任將能發揮重要的資訊強制作用，因為這個領域的
公眾理解，常受限於營業秘密。




   康乃爾大學法學院教授。
80            《中研院法學期刊》第34期（2024年3月）



  正如法律和政治經濟學方法所表明的，法律對於新技術市場不
可能保持中立。法律構建了新技術市場，促使某些未來發展更易成
真，或使另一些發展不易實現。區分一項技術，究竟係替代、或輔
助人類專業知識或者輔助專業人士，不僅對勞工政策、對自動化的
政治經濟學、也對侵權法，均至關重要。

關鍵詞：人工智慧（AI）、機器人技術、責任、自動化、自動化決
    策、醫療事故、企業責任、專業人員、政治經濟學、臨床
    決策支援軟體。
