 主題演說
《中研院法學期刊》第 37 期                                                                  1
頁 1-26（2025 年 9 月）

                                主題演說

    Secondary Use of Government Information
                            ＊
                 in Germany

                            Keynote Address

                      (Delivered on December 15, 2023)

                                                ＊＊
                           Matthias Bäcker


                                  Contents
 I. Introduction
 II. General legal framework for the secondary use of government
      information
      A. Secondary use by public authorities
      B. Secondary use by private actors
      C. Functional limitations of the general rules
 III. Sector-specific requirements for the secondary use of government
      information
      A. Transmission of sensitive data – example: results of surveillance by
          security authorities
      B. Inter-agency information systems
      C. Platforms for complex analyses – example: central platform for health
          data
 IV. Conclusion


＊  Submission Date: December 3, 2024. [Line Editor: Mu-Wei Hsu & Chun-Neng
   Cheng].
＊＊ Professor, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz.
   Online: https://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/31906052.pdf
2                                        《中研院法學期刊》第37期（2025年9月）



I. Introduction

      For a long time, German administrative law was essentially
concerned with legally binding acts of the administration. Administrative
proceedings were a matter of law mainly insofar as they directly
prepared such acts. This also applied to the exchange of information
between public authorities, for which there were few legal limits. By
contrast, official secrecy characterised the informational relationship
between public authorities and private bodies. Only if a person could
demonstrate a specific interest did they have a limited right of access to
government information.

      The legal situation has changed fundamentally in recent decades.
The “discovery” of data protection law led to the internal informational
relations of the administration being comprehensively covered by legal
rules. Germany was a pioneer in this field of law, with the milestones of
the Hessian Data Protection Act of 1970, the first data protection law
worldwide, and the fundamental 1983 census judgement of the Federal
                                                                     1
Constitutional Court (Bundesverfassungsgericht, BVerfG). In contrast,
German law lagged behind international developments when it came to
releasing government information to the public. Nevertheless, the federal
government and most of the states (Länder) now have freedom of
information acts that give private actors a general right of access to such
information.




1   BVerfG, 1 BvR 209, 269, 362, 420, 440, 484/83, Dec. 15, 1983, english translation
    available at https://www.bundesverfassungsgericht.de/SharedDocs/Entscheidungen/
    EN/1983/12/rs19831215_1bvr020983en.html.
Secondary Use of Government Information in Germany                        3


     More recently, the idea that government information can contribute
to the efficient fulfilment of public tasks and the creation of social value
has gained ground in Germany. Today, the metaphor of government
information as raw material to be refined by public authorities and
private actors is common. From this perspective, the law should provide
a framework for the most efficient secondary use of such information. In
this contribution, I will give a broad outline of this legal framework.

     Beforehand, I would like to clarify the subject of this contribution,
i.e. the concept of secondary use. Public authorities collect information
to fulfil specific tasks and usually in the context of specific
administrative proceedings. For example, a law enforcement authority
collects information in order to investigate a criminal offence as a
concrete historical event. Secondary use of government information
removes this information from its original context and processes it for a
new purpose. This concept includes secondary use by the public
authority that originally obtained the information and by another public
or private body. Secondary use in this sense already occurs, for example,
if a law enforcement agency uses information that it has obtained to
investigate a specific criminal offence to prosecute another criminal
offence. The purpose of data collection and the purpose of secondary
data use are further apart if, for example, a research organisation uses
health data originally obtained in the course of treating patients for a
study on the effectiveness of a drug.

     My contribution consists of two parts. German law contains a
general framework for the secondary use of government information.
This framework applies in principle to all government information,
regardless of its subject matter, and to all secondary uses, regardless of
their purpose. I will present these general rules in the first part of my
4                                   《中研院法學期刊》第37期（2025年9月）



contribution. It will become clear that the general rules reach their limits
in certain situations. In order to enable secondary use in those situations,
more specific rules are required. These are usually limited to specific
information or specific purposes. In the second part of my contribution, I
will provide examples of sector-specific rules on the secondary use of
government information, which have recently attracted particular
attention in Germany.



II. General legal framework for the secondary use
    of government information

     The general legal framework for the secondary use of government
information must overcome a conflict of objectives. On the one hand,
the law should enable the smoothest possible further processing of
government information. Further processing is an essential building
block for the efficient fulfilment of public tasks and can make a
significant contribution to value creation. On the other hand, the
confidentiality of sensitive information must be safeguarded. The rules
on further processing therefore have both an enabling function and a
limiting function.

     This conflict of objectives arises differently in the case of secondary
use by a public authority and by a private actor. Public authorities have
far-reaching powers at their disposal. They may only act, however,
within the scope of their tasks and must comply with a variety of public
law requirements. In contrast, private actors are, in principle, free to
decide on their objectives and are generally not accountable to the public
for their actions. In view of these differences, the general requirements
Secondary Use of Government Information in Germany                     5


for the secondary use of government information by public authorities
and private actors differ considerably. I will therefore present these
requirements separately.

A. Secondary use by public authorities
     Secondary use of government information by public authorities
requires an efficient public informational infrastructure. German law
contains numerous general provisions to ensure such an infrastructure.
These aim at the greatest possible digitisation of administrative
processes and the interoperability of public information systems. They
include, for example, the general obligation to keep digital files or
obligations to use standardised file formats. However, the actual
development of digital administration in Germany currently lags
considerably behind the legal target status. For example, electronic file
management has not yet been introduced across the board. In addition,
there are still numerous historically grown databases that work with
outdated or unusual file formats and cannot be seamlessly networked
with other systems. Many administrative processes are also subject to
media discontinuities. These not only impair the efficiency of individual
processes, but also make the secondary use of the processed data
considerably more difficult.

     The general requirements for the digital administration intend to
create an informational infrastructure. They say nothing directly about
which authorities should have which information and with which other
authorities they should share this information. However, general
principles of German administrative law provide guidelines for these
questions. For instance, public authorities are generally obliged to keep
6                                        《中研院法學期刊》第37期（2025年9月）


                                                                     2
files on their procedures and thus document their actions. In addition,
public authorities must support each other in the fulfilment of their
         3
tasks.       This administrative assistance includes the transfer of
government information.

     Nevertheless, the general rules provide only a rudimentary legal
framework to enable the secondary use of government information.
More specific, albeit still quite open, rules can be found on the limits of
such use. These limits result primarily from individual rights. Data
protection law takes centre stage. The requirements under data
protection law generally arise from the General Data Protection
Regulation of the European Union (GDPR). In addition, German law
                                                                           4
specifies this regulation on the basis of various opening clauses.

     The secondary use of government information is subject to data
protection requirements insofar as this information contains personal
data. The concept of personal data is very broad and includes information
about a merely identifiable natural person. It is therefore sufficient that
government information can be linked to a person by means of additional
                5
information.        As a result, a large proportion of all government
information falls within the scope of European data protection law.



2 This obligation arises from the constitutional principle of the rule of law
  (Rechtsstaatsprinzip) laid down in Grundgesetz [GG] [Basic Law], art. 20 (3), the
  German constitution, cf. BVerwG, NVwZ 1988, S. 621 (622).
3 GG, art. 35 (1).
4 E.g., Regulation (EU) 2016/679, of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27
  April 2016 on the Protection of Natural Persons with regard to the Processing of
  Personal Data and on the Free Movement of such Data, and Repealing Directive
  95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 1, art. 6 (2), (3)
  and (4), art. 9 (2), art. 10, art. 23, art. 85 et seqq. [hereinafter GDPR].
5 Cf. Case C-582/14, Patrick Breyer v. Bundesrepublik Deutschland, ECLI:EU:C:2016:779,
  paras. 31 et seqq. (Oct. 19, 2016).
Secondary Use of Government Information in Germany                                   7


      According to European data protection law, the processing of
                                                                  6
personal data is only permitted if there is a legal basis. This applies to
each individual processing operation. In the secondary use of
government information, processing operations that require a legal basis
include the original collection of certain data, the storage of the data, the
transfer of the data to another body and the use of the data by the
recipient.

      The GDPR lists the possible legal bases for processing exhaustively.
For the secondary use of government information by public authorities,
it is particularly important that processing is lawful if it is necessary for
                                         7
the performance of a public task. In this case, a further legal basis in
EU law or Member State law is needed. German data protection law
contains general authorisation regulations that largely correspond to the
                           8
wording of the GDPR.

      Accordingly, the necessity for the performance of a task is the
central legal requirement for the storage, transmission and use of
government information. In addition, data processing must also be
proportionate. The criteria of necessity and proportionality require the
public interest in data processing to be balanced against the conflicting
rights and freedoms of the data subject.

      In addition, the principle of purpose limitation must be observed.
According to this principle, the controller must collect data for a
specified purpose. They may in principle only process the data for


6   GDPR, art. 5 (1) (a), art. 6 (1).
7   GDPR, art. 6 (1) (e).
8   E.g., with regard to federal public authorities, Bundesdatenschutzgesetz [BDSG]
    [Federal Data Protection Act], Jan 27, 1977, BGBl. I at 201, last amended by Gesetz
    [G], June 30, 2017, BGBl. I at 2097, § 3 (Ger.).
8                                            《中研院法學期刊》第37期（2025年9月）



purposes that are compatible with the purpose for which it was collected.
Further processing for archiving, research and statistical purposes is
privileged and therefore always compatible with the purpose of
            9
collection. In addition, provisions of EU law or Member State law may
provide for a change in the purpose of processing if they serve a
                                                       10
sufficiently important public or private interest.

      In addition to the requirements for the lawfulness of data processing,
data protection law contains procedural and organisational requirements.
                                         11
The rights of the data subject                are particularly important for the
secondary use of government information. On the one hand, these rights
guarantee the transparency of the processing. For example, the controller
must provide the data subject with information about the intended
processing. In addition, the data subject has a right of access. This
includes a right to obtain a copy of the processed data as well as meta-
information about, among others, the purpose of processing, the origin
of the data or the recipients of the data. On the other hand, the data
subject's rights grant the data subject some influence on the data
processing. For example, the data subject can request that the controller
erase data that is no longer required or correct inaccurate data. If the data
processing causes particular hardship for the data subject due to their
specific situation, the data subject may object to the processing.

      By ensuring that the controller only processes data that is necessary
and accurate, the rights of the data subject contribute to data quality. In
this respect, these rights indirectly promote the public purposes served
by the secondary use of government information. It hence falls short of

9 GDPR, art. 5 (1) (b).
10 GDPR, art. 6 (4); cf. e.g., BDSG, § 23.
11 GDPR, arts. 12 et seqq.
Secondary Use of Government Information in Germany                               9


the mark to understand data protection law solely as a restriction on
secondary use. Rather, the provisions of data protection law have a
structuring effect, which also benefits the public interest in effective and
efficient secondary use.

B. Secondary use by private actors
     The legal framework for the secondary use of government
information by private actors differs from the secondary use by public
authorities in several respects. Public authorities are not generally
obliged to provide data access to interested private parties. Since the turn
of the millennium, however, the federal government and most states
have introduced provisions that guarantee private actors unconditional
access to government information.

     The oldest rules on access to government information can be found
                                                                          12
in the Freedom of Information Acts of the federal government                   and
             13
most states.      These statutes allow anyone to request access to most
government information. In recent years, some states have expanded
                                                                                14
their freedom of information laws into transparency laws.
Transparency laws oblige state authorities to publish certain information
on a transparency platform independently of a request. This includes, for
instance, legislative materials, official statistics, or information on the
economic activities of the public sector.



12 Federal Act Governing Access to Information held by the Federal Government,
   Gesetz zur Regelung des Zugangs zu Informationen des Bundes [IFG] [Freedom of
   Information Act], Sept. 5, 2005 (Ger.).
13 The only states that have not yet passed a Freedom of Information Act are Lower
   Saxony (Niedersachsen) and Bavaria (Bayern).
14 The first German transparency law was the Hamburgisches Transparenzgesetz
   [HmbTG] [Hamburg Transparency Act], June 19, 2012 (Ger).
10                                       《中研院法學期刊》第37期（2025年9月）



     The Freedom of Information Acts grant access to government
information to private actors who wish to utilise that information
commercially. In principle, access petitioners can also request access to
machine-readable raw data and the associated meta-information based
on these laws. However, these laws do not provide for the
comprehensive publication of such data.

     To close this gap, the federal legislature and some states have
                                                    15
recently introduced open data regulations.               These regulations oblige
public authorities to make their raw data sets and associated metadata
publicly available in unprocessed, machine-readable form. The metadata
must be published on a central platform. The open data regulations are
intended to enable private actors to process the published data directly
and automatically.

     Finally, sector-specific regulations oblige public authorities to
publish certain data sets in machine-readable form. Examples include
         16                                                        17
geodata       or certain information about the environment.

     According to both the Freedom of Information Acts and the open
data regulations, government information must be provided in the form
in which it is available to the authority. These regulations do not provide
for the data to be checked before it is passed on or for other specific
measures to ensure data quality.



15 E.g., with regard to federal public authorities, Gesetz zur Förderung der
   elektronischen Verwaltung [EGovG] [Federal E-Government Act], July 25, 2013, §
   12a (Ger.).
16 E.g., with regard to federal public authorities, Gesetz über den Zugang zu digitalen
   Geodaten [GeoZG] [Spatial Data Access Act], Feb. 10, 2009, §§ 5 et seqq. (Ger.).
17 E.g., with regard to federal public authorities, Umweltinformationsgesetz [UIG]
   [Federal Environmental Information Act], Dec. 22, 2004, § 10 (Ger.).
Secondary Use of Government Information in Germany                             11


    All regulations that provide for access to government information
by private bodies are subject to restrictions. These restrictions go well
beyond the regulations for data exchange between public authorities.
                                                                               18
      On the one hand, access restrictions result from individual rights.
As with the exchange of information between public authorities, data
protection must be observed. The Freedom of Information Acts stipulate
that the obligated authorities may only disclose personal data if the data
subject consents or if the access interest of the access petitioner
outweighs the rights and freedoms of the data subject. In addition, all
regulations on data access contain provisions to ensure the protection of
trade secrets and intellectual property rights.

      On the other hand, public interests can restrict access to
              19
information. For example, a public authority may not release any
information that is classified. Access to data is also excluded if it could
frustrate the objective of an official procedure or jeopardise public safety.
Some authorities are even excluded completely from the scope of the
Freedom of Information Acts. For example, the Federal Freedom of
                                                             20
Information Act does not apply to the intelligence services.

     More recent regulations go beyond the access of private bodies to
government information and deal with the use of the information
obtained. The aim of these regulations is to ensure the efficient use of
government information and to rule out discriminatory conditions of use.
For instance, they limit fees for access to government information and
                                          21
rule out granting exclusive rights of use.

18 E.g., IFG, §§ 5 et seq.
19 E.g., IFG, §§ 3 et seq. er.
20 IFG, § 3 no. 8.
21 Gesetz für die Nutzung von Daten des öffentlichen Sektors [DNG] [Data Use Act],
   July 16, 2021, §§ 6, 10 (Ger.).
12                                              《中研院法學期刊》第37期（2025年9月）



C. Functional limitations of the general rules
       The general rules on the secondary use of government information
for public authorities and private actors differ significantly. They are,
however, similar in terms of their performance and limitations.

       The general rules provide a legal framework that enables the
secondary use of government information in principle. Secondary use is,
however, limited to data currently held by public authorities. The general
rules do not oblige public authorities to collect or store certain data or to
process the data stored by them in a certain form to enable secondary use.
Moreover, there are no general requirements for data quality that are
specifically tailored to the secondary use of government information.

       Further limitations of the general regulations arise from the
restrictions on access to government information. The regulations on
data access by private bodies contain far-reaching exceptions to protect
individual rights and public interests. The general rules on data exchange
between public authorities are formulated more broadly. Nevertheless, as
far as the exchange of personal data is concerned, the scope of these
provisions is limited due to higher-ranking law. Under European and
German law, data protection is not merely a regulatory objective, but
                                    22
also a fundamental right.                  The legal bases for data processing must
therefore comply with the fundamental right to data protection and must
be interpreted in accordance with this fundamental right. With the
requirements of necessity and proportionality, the general legal bases
under data protection law provide for minimum requirements only. They
therefore cannot be applied to more intrusive data processing, which


22 Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union art. 8, 2012 O.J. (C 326) 391,
     397; GG, art. 2 (1) and art. 1 (1).
Secondary Use of Government Information in Germany                                13


encroaches intensively on the fundamental right to data protection. Such
encroachment requires a specific legal basis that is tailored to the
                                                                                  23
purpose of the processing in question and contains specific safeguards.

       With regard to the secondary use of government information,
specific legal bases are required for the following types of use in
particular:
1.     the transmission and use of data that is particularly sensitive,
2.     the creation of comprehensive information systems that enable the
       exchange of data for many participating bodies,
3.     the use of complex analysis technology that can generate far-
       reaching new information.



III. Sector-specific requirements for the secondary use
     of government information

       The need for specific rules for these types of use is largely
undisputed. However, the exact requirements for data access and data
use are not yet completely clear. In the following, I will present
examples of the various types of use, which have recently been the
subject of key court decisions or are the subject of pending proceedings.
I should disclose that I am acting as representative or advisor to the data
subjects in all pending proceedings that I will discuss.




23 Cf. e.g., with respect to CCTV surveillance, BVerfG, 1 BvR 2368/06, Feb. 23, 2007,
     paras. 41 et seqq.
14                                          《中研院法學期刊》第37期（2025年9月）



A. Transmission of sensitive data – example: results of
   surveillance by security authorities
       The simplest form of access to government information consists of
a public authority transmitting data to another body. A specific legal
basis is needed if the data is particularly sensitive. Sensitivity may result
from the subject matter of the data. For example, data concerning a
                                                                            24
person's health or sexual orientation is sensitive in this sense.                By
contrast, the case law of the Federal Constitutional Court has so far
focussed on the transmission of data that an authority has collected using
particularly intrusive means. The security authorities, i.e. the police, law
enforcement agencies and intelligence agencies, are primarily authorised
to use such means.

       The regulatory problem which arises from the transmission of
sensitive data can be illustrated using the example of criminal procedure
law. The German Code of Criminal Procedure only authorises the use of
intrusive data collection measures, such as the surveillance of
telecommunications, under strict conditions. Firstly, the law enforcement
authorities may only use such measures to prosecute serious criminal
offences. Secondly, intrusive measures must be based on a substantiated
                                       25
suspicion of a criminal offence.

       If the law enforcement authorities were allowed to transfer the
information they have gained through intrusive measures to other public
authorities based on the general rules, the transfer would only depend on
whether that information is necessary to fulfil the tasks of these


24 Cf. GDPR, art. 9 (1).
25 E.g., with respect to telecommunications surveillance, Strafprozeßordnung [StPO]
     [Code of Criminal Procedure], § 100a (Ger.).
Secondary Use of Government Information in Germany                                   15


authorities. This could serve to circumvent the legal requirements for
intrusive surveillance. The recipient of the data could receive
information that they are not authorised to collect themselves. This is
because not all official tasks are so significant that they would warrant
intrusive surveillance. Furthermore, the principle of necessity under data
protection law does not presuppose particularly substantiated factual
grounds for a transfer of data.

      The Federal Constitutional Court has in its case law derived a
criterion for the transfer of sensitive data which serves to avoid such
circumvention. The Court refers to this criterion as hypothetical re-
collection of data. According to this criterion, the legislator may only
authorise such a data transfer if its purpose is so important that it could
                                                                       26
justify the collection of the data by the measure in question.

      The criterion of hypothetical re-collection of data significantly
restricts the secondary use of information that a security authority has
obtained by intrusive means. This criterion primarily allows data transfers
to other security authorities. Data transfers to authorities that are not
specifically tasked with protecting public security and fighting crime are,
as a matter of principle, only permitted where there is grave and imminent
danger. Furthermore, the recipient may only use the data to avert that
        27
danger.      The recipient must therefore not use the transmitted data for

26 BVerfG, 1 BvR 966/09, 1 BvR 1140/09, Apr. 20, 2016, paras. 286 et seqq., english
   translation available at https://www.bundesverfassungsgericht.de/SharedDocs/Entsche
   idungen/EN/2016/04/rs20160420_1bvr096609en.html; BVerfG, 1 BvR 1619/17, Apr.
   26, 2022, paras. 230 et seqq., english translation available at https://www.bundesver
   fassungsgericht.de/SharedDocs/Entscheidungen/EN/2022/04/rs20220426_1bvr16191
   7en.html.
27 Cf. e.g., Gesetz über die Zusammenarbeit des Bundes und der Länder in Angelegenheiten
   des Verfassungsschutzes und über das Bundesamt für Verfassungsschutz [BVerfSchG]
   [Federal Act on the Protection of the Constitution], Dec. 20, 1990, § 19 (1) (Ger.).
16                                    《中研院法學期刊》第37期（2025年9月）



the regular fulfilment of its tasks, insofar as those tasks go beyond a
mere crisis response. Accordingly, the recipient may not store the data in
its own databases beyond the specific occasion of the data transfer.

     Furthermore, there is little leeway for the transfer of data that a
security authority has obtained by intrusive means to private bodies.
Such transfers are primarily permitted to avert serious threats by
                                                                28
enabling the recipient to take self-protection measures.             However,
transfers for research purposes, which are authorised under many
security law statutes, have a special status. For example, research
institutions may receive files from criminal proceedings if a research
project cannot otherwise be carried out. To protect the data subjects, the
transferred files are subject to strict purpose limitation. In addition, the
persons reviewing the files are under a special obligation to maintain
                29
confidentiality.

B. Inter-agency information systems
     Inter-agency information systems, in which several public
authorities share their data, pose more complex regulatory problems than
the mere transfer of data. Such systems create specific risks for the data
subjects. They usually store data for long periods of time, even if the
public authority that originally collected the data no longer needs it to
fulfil its tasks. By removing data from the context in which it was
collected, information systems may lead to misinterpretations when the
data are used. The storage of personal data in inter-agency information



   Exceptional cases of data transfers without imminent danger are regulated in
   BVerfSchG, § 20.
28 Cf. e.g., BVerfSchG, § 22a.
29 Cf. e.g., StPO, § 476.
Secondary Use of Government Information in Germany                         17


systems can significantly restrict the privacy of the data subjects due to
the sheer volume of data stored. Finally, storing large volumes of data
inevitably entails risks for the confidentiality of the data.

     These risks arise from the data storage itself, not only from the
subsequent transmission and use of the stored data. Data storage therefore
requires a legal basis that limits the scope of storage to what is necessary
and minimises the remaining risks through substantive, procedural and
technological requirements. The subsequent transmission and use of the
stored data must be understood as independent processing operations,
which in turn harbour risks of their own. Therefore, specific legal bases
are also required for the transmission and use of the stored data.

     In Germany, there is still considerable uncertainty as to which
regulatory approaches are appropriate to mitigate the risks of the storage
and use of data in inter-agency information systems. I will illustrate this
uncertainty with the example of two information systems. One of them
was the subject of a recent landmark decision by the Federal
Constitutional Court. The other is currently being challenged in
proceedings before several administrative courts.

    1. Example 1: Information network of the Federal Criminal
       Police Office
     My first example is the information network of the Federal
Criminal Police Office (Bundeskriminalamt, BKA). The Federal
Criminal Police Office is a federal police authority. There are several
                                                30
other federal and state police authorities.          The fulfilment of general


30 Cf. in more detail MATTHIAS HERDEGEN ET AL. EDS., CONSTITUTIONAL LAW IN
   GERMANY, at § 28 paras. 77 et seq. (2024).
18                                         《中研院法學期刊》第37期（2025年9月）



police tasks is the responsibility of the states. By contrast, the main task
of the Federal Criminal Police Office is to support and coordinate the
other German police authorities. The information network is paramount
to that task. It is a central database for law enforcement purposes in
which all German police authorities participate.

         The legal basis of the information network was the subject of a
                                                                              31
recent landmark judgment by the Federal Constitutional Court.                      In this
judgment, the Court had to decide for the first time on the constitutional
framework of information systems, in which public authorities store data
as a precautionary measure for use in future proceedings.

         The Federal Constitutional Court declared a provision of the
Federal Criminal Police Office Act unconstitutional that permits
precautionary storage of data relating to a person who is charged with a
criminal offence. Such storage is generally permitted even if the charges
are ultimately dropped or the data subject is acquitted in a criminal
         32
trial.        The Federal Constitutional Court held that this provision is
unconstitutional as far as it permits data storage. According to the Court,
the precautionary retention of police data is only constitutionally
permissible if it is based on a sufficiently clear factual basis. If personal
data is retained for law enforcement purposes, this prerequisite is only
met if the data subject is likely to be connected to future crimes and the
data can make a reasonable contribution to the prevention and
prosecution of such crimes. The mere fact that the data subject has been

31 Disclosure: I acted as representative of the complainants in the proceedings before the
     Federal Constitutional Court.
32 Gesetz über das Bundeskriminalamt und die Zusammenarbeit des Bundes und der
     Länder in kriminalpolizeilichen Angelegenheiten [BKAG] [Federal Criminal Police
     Office Act], Jan. 1, 1951, BGBl. I at 165, last amended by Gesetz [G], June 1, 2017,
     BGBl. I at 1354, § 18 (1) no. 2 and (5) (Ger.).
Secondary Use of Government Information in Germany                             19


charged with a criminal offence is not sufficient. Since it is uncertain
whether the data subject committed the offence, such a charge does not
by itself justify the conclusion that the data subject will be linked to
future offences. By contrast, the provision in question does not require a
                                                                     33
more concrete prediction of such offences by the data subject.

     Moreover, the legal basis of the information network does not
distinguish between the processing operations of data storage and data
use. It regulates both operations in the same provisions under the
common term of further processing. This approach inevitably leads to
the legal basis falling short of the mark with respect to data use. Once
the police have stored personal data, they are free to use it for all kinds
of analyses without further justification. This means that little remains of
the principle of purpose limitation, which is of central importance for the
fundamental right to data protection. It is therefore essential that the use
of the stored data depend on specific conditions. These conditions must
relate to the purpose of the use and effectively guide this processing
operation. Unfortunately, the Federal Constitutional Court did not decide
on data use, since the Court considered the constitutional complaint
                               34
inadmissible in that respect.

     2. Example 2: Central Register of Foreign Nationals
     The judgment on the information network of the Federal Criminal
Police Office is also significant for other inter-agency information
systems. The Central Register of Foreign Nationals provides another



33 BVerfG, 1 BvR 1160/19, Oct. 1, 2024, paras. 178 et seqq., english translation
   available at https://www.bundesverfassungsgericht.de/SharedDocs/Entscheidungen/
   EN/2024/10/rs20241001_1bvr116019en.html.
34 Ibid. paras. 72 et seq.
20                                         《中研院法學期刊》第37期（2025年9月）



example of such a system. This register is a database maintained by the
Federal Office for Migration and Refugees (Bundesamt für Migration
und Flüchtlinge, BAMF). It contains information on all foreign nationals
who are permanently resident in Germany or who otherwise have a close
connection to Germany. With around 26 million records, it is one of the
most comprehensive public registers in Germany. Exactly what data is
                                                                                 35
stored about a person depends on the reason for the storage.                          For
example, a particularly extensive set of data is stored on people who
arrive in Germany as refugees. With respect to these persons, the register
contains, among other data, biometric data such as photographs and
fingerprint samples as well as information on religious affiliation,
education or occupation. Moreover, the Central Register of Foreign
Nationals serves as a central document repository, which stores the full
text of official and court decisions relating to asylum and residence law.

      All public authorities in Germany can access data from the Central
Register of Foreigners. In total, more than 16,000 public authorities with
over 150,000 individual users have access to this database. However,
most agencies are only authorised to access part of the data stored. Some
                                                                                       36
authorities, such as the security authorities, have comprehensive access.

      Several foreign nationals have recently filed lawsuits before various
administrative courts in which they challenge parts of the legal basis of
                                                     37
the Central Register of Foreign Nationals.                These lawsuits provide an


35 Gesetz über das Ausländerzentralregister [AZRG] [Central Register of Foreign
   Nationals Act], Sept. 2, 1994, last amended by Gesetz [G], May 8, 2024, BGBl. I at
   152, § 12 (1) no. 3 (Ger.).
36 AZRG, §§ 10 et seqq.
37 Cf. for more detailed information on the proceedings, english available at GFF, THE
   CENTRAL REGISTER OF FOREIGNERS – A DATA COLLECTION OUT OF CONTROL,
   https://freiheitsrechte.org/en/themen/gleichbehandlung/azr (last visited Dec. 4, 2024).
Secondary Use of Government Information in Germany                               21


opportunity for the administrative courts to evaluate the constitutional
and European law standards for the relationship between the scope of
data storage and the conditions of data use with respect to a complex
inter-agency collection of sensitive data. The plaintiffs argue that the
register contains some very sensitive information. This is particularly
true for the full texts of asylum decisions. The examination of an asylum
application requires a comprehensive examination of the applicant's
claim to be politically persecuted. The reasoning of such a decision may
therefore include information on ethnicity, physical and mental health,
sexual identity, violence suffered or the religious, ideological, and
political beliefs of the data subject. It is not immediately clear why these
documents need to be stored centrally. Moreover, the threshold for
accessing them is quite low. The law only requires that knowledge of the
data be necessary to fulfil the tasks of the receiving authority. The
requirements for access therefore do not go beyond the minimum
standard under data protection law. It appears questionable whether this
is sufficient to justify the encroachment on the fundamental right to data
protection given its considerable intensity.

C. Platforms for complex analyses – example:
   central platform for health data
     Finally, the so-called data transparency platform provides an
example of an extensive information system that provides data for
                          38
complex analyses.              The Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical
Devices (Bundesamt für Arzneimittel und Medizinprodukte, BfArM) runs
this information system, acting as a research data centre. The data


38 Sozialgesetzbuch Fünftes Buch [SGB V] [Volume 5 of the Social Insurance Code], §§
   303a et seqq (Ger.).
22                                         《中研院法學期刊》第37期（2025年9月）



transparency platform contains health data of all persons insured by the
statutory health insurance scheme. This is just under 90 per cent of the
German population. The data transparency platform makes this data
available for various purposes, including medical research, the
development and evaluation of pharmaceuticals, planning, analysing and
evaluating healthcare and health reporting. It stores basic data such as
age and gender as well as information on illnesses, medical treatments,
and prescribed medications in pseudonymised form for a period of up to
100 years. Potential users of the data transparency platform include
public health authorities, research institutions and pharmaceutical
companies.

       In the context of an evaluation project, the research data centre
generally carries out the necessary calculations as specified by the
authorised user. The research data centre then transmits the results to the
authorised user in anonymised and aggregated form. If required for the
purpose of the analysis, the research data centre may provide the
authorised user with pseudonymised individual data sets. Data
processing is only permitted in a secure physical or virtual environment
under the control of the research data centre.

       Two lawsuits are currently pending, which were filed by persons
with statutory insurance who are objecting to the transfer of their
                                                      39
insurance data to the research data centre.                The plaintiffs are of the
opinion that the legal basis of the data transparency platform infringes


39 Cf. for more detailed information on the proceedings, english available at GFF,
     DATABASE WITH HEALTH DATA OF 73 MILLION STATUTORILY INSURED INDIVIDUALS
     MUST NOT BECOME A DATA LEAK, https://freiheitsrechte.org/en/themen/digitale-
     grundrechte/datenbank-mit-gesundheitsdaten-von-73-millionen-gesetzlich-versicherten-
     darf-nicht-zum-datenleak-werden (last visited Dec. 4, 2024).
Secondary Use of Government Information in Germany                                23


European data protection law and the fundamental right to data
protection. They state two grounds for their actions.

     Firstly, the plaintiffs criticise the centralisation of data storage at the
research data centre. They believe that the health insurance funds could
carry out the analyses in a decentralised manner through distributed
calculations. This would avoid the security risks associated with
centralised data storage. In addition, decentralised data storage would
strengthen the rights of data subjects. For example, the research data
centre is not able to provide a data subject with information about the
stored pseudonymised data, as it does not know and is not permitted to
know which persons the individual data records relate to. With
decentralised data storage, on the other hand, a request for access to the
stored data could easily be granted.

     Secondly, the plaintiffs consider it disproportionate that their health
data is stored in the data transparency platform even against their
declared will. In the opinion of the plaintiffs, they must have a right to
object to the storage and use of their data, which could be limited to
individual analysis projects if necessary. At the very least, particularly
vulnerable persons who could be identified with little additional
information should have such a right to object. For example, one of the
plaintiffs suffers from a combination of rare diseases that only occurs in
a small number of people throughout Germany.

     Together with their lawsuits, the plaintiffs filed applications for
interim measures to prevent the transfer of their health data to the
                                                                   40
research data centre. These applications were successful.               By contrast,


40 Sozialgericht [SG] [Social Welfare Court] June 1, 2022, S 25 KR 932/22 DS ER,
   https://www.sozialgerichtsbarkeit.de/node/172283; Landessozialgericht [LSG] [State
24                                       《中研院法學期刊》第37期（2025年9月）



the main proceedings are currently suspended as the research data centre
is not yet operational. In one of the lawsuits, however, the court has
indicated that it is considering a referral to the Court of Justice of the
European Union for a preliminary ruling. The proceedings could
therefore lead to a landmark decision on the balance between research
interests and data protection in the healthcare sector. Such a decision
could be significant beyond the scope of the pending proceedings since
several current legislative proposals in Germany and the European
Union provide for an expansion of the secondary use of health data.



IV. Conclusion

       German law contains a general framework for the secondary use of
government information, which is supplemented by numerous sector-
specific regulations. This regulatory technique means that the legal basis
for secondary use is not very clear. It is fair to assume that nobody has a
complete overview of the multitude of public information systems and
the associated regulations on the storage and use of data. However, in
view of the diversity of official tasks and the data collected in the
fulfilment of these tasks, the sector-specific regulatory approach seems
unavoidable.

       Data protection law currently poses the biggest regulatory challenge
in relation to the secondary use of government information. In particular,
the data protection requirements for cross-authority information systems
are still unclear in several respects. Nevertheless, it would be a


     Social Welfare Court], Sept. 14, 2022, L 8 KR 168/22 DS B ER, https://www.sozial
     gerichtsbarkeit.de/node/172282.
Secondary Use of Government Information in Germany                       25


misconception to view data protection law merely as an obstacle to the
secondary use of government information. Data protection law largely
permits such use, provided that it takes sufficient account of the interests
of the data subjects through substantive, organisational and procedural
requirements. The associated regulatory problems appear to be solvable.
The rights of data subjects can even contribute to data quality and thus
favour efficient secondary use.

     The biggest obstacle on the way to efficient secondary use of
government information in Germany is likely to be the unsatisfactory
state of digitisation of the administration. The legal requirements for
administrative digitisation have so far done little to change the fact that
Germany is lagging behind other comparably developed countries.
Whether and how better regulation can help to catch up is a key question
for modern administration from a German perspective. In this respect, it
is important to learn from successful models abroad.
26                              《中研院法學期刊》第37期（2025年9月）




                            References

Herdegen, Matthias, Johannes Masing, Ralf Poscher, and Klaus
     Ferdinand Gärditz, eds. 2024. Constitutional Law in Germany.
     München: C. H. Beck.
