Contract versus Property Remedies                                               1




                                    主題演說

                                                                         ＊
        Contract versus Property Remedies

                            Keynote Address

                         (Delivered on June 15, 2012)

                           Omri Ben-Shahar＊＊


                                    Contents
 Introduction
    I. Property and Contract Remedies
         A. Conversion of Property by Seller
         B. Breach of License v. Infringement of Intellectual Property
         C. Breach of Fiduciary Contract
    II. Ex Post versus Ex Ante Measures of Damages
    III. The Distortive Effect of the Remedial Options
    IV. Impaired Liability Rules
 Conclusion




＊  Submission: November 2, 2012; Editorial assistants: Man-Ting Chien; Chia-Ju
   Chang.
   Mike Morrill provided valuable research assistance. This article builds on and
   extends two previous articles: Omri Ben-Shahar, Damages for Unlicensed Use, 78
   U. CHI. L. REV. 2 (2011); Omri Ben-Shahar & Robert A. Mikos, The (Legal) Value
   of Chance: Distorted Measures for Recovery in Private Law, 7 AM. L. & ECON.
   REV. 484 (2005).
＊＊ Leo Herzel Professor of Law, The University of Chicago Law School.
2                                   《中研院法學期刊》第12期（2013年3月）



     This Article investigates the distinction between the damages for
breach of contract and for violation of property rights. It identifies a
class of situations in which both types of remedies may be available to
an aggrieved party. Using economic analysis, it argues that in these
situations the unclear boundaries between contract and property
remedies can create distortions in measuring recovery and in the
incentive of wrongdoers. This distortion is aggravated by an additional
option to measure damages based on ex-post realization versus ex ante
expected value.



Introduction

     This Article examines the interface between two types of damage
remedies: for breach of contract and for violation of a property right. For
example, an employee may cause harm to the employer’s property, and
this may constitute a breach of the employment contract but also a
violation of the employer’s physical property rights. Or, a licensee may
make an unlicensed use of intellectual property rights, and this may
constituted a breach the license contract and also an infringement upon
the property rights of the licensor. Or, a seller may use the goods he
already sold, but did not yet deliver to the buyer, and this may be a
breach of contract and also a violation of the buyer’s acquired property
rights.

     In each one of these setting, the property owner has a contractual
relation with the offender, and thus a fundamental question arises—
which remedy applies? Is the aggrieved property owner entitled to the
remedies that protect property rights? Or is he entitled to the remedies
Contract versus Property Remedies                                        3




that protect the contractual relations he happens to have with the
offender? Or, perhaps yet, is he entitled to both, or to a choice between
the two arsenals of remedial claims?

     This distinction between breach of contract and violation of
property has important implications for measuring damages. Damages
for breach of contract are based on a principle that is unique to contract
law—the protection of the expectation interest of the aggrieved party. He
is entitled to money damages that will provide him the benefit he
expected to get from the contract, but not necessarily the value of the
damaged property. In contrast, damages for violation of property rights
are based on two different principles that are fundamental to property but
not to contract law—harm and restitution. The offender has to pay for
the harm to the damaged property, irrespective of the contractual
expectations. And if the offender benefitted from the violation, this
benefit can be disgorged and “returned” to the property owner.

     Consider the following example: A copyright owner licenses the
right to publish his novel in a specific medium, say, in paperback, to a
licensee. The licensee commits one of three wrongful acts: (1) he
launches the distribution belatedly, thereby reducing the owner’s profits;
(2) he distributes the work in additional media that were not covered by
the license, and reaps much profits; (3) he makes changes to the text of
the work, cutting chapters and revising the story’s ending, to make the
book more “marketable.” In each of these cases, did he commit a breach
of contract? Or did he infringe upon the owner’s copyright? Are
damages limited to the owner’s lost profits, which might often be low or
hard to prove, or could the damages instead be measured by the
violator’s profits, which are higher and easier to prove?
4                                        《中研院法學期刊》第12期（2013年3月）



         In the first part of this Article, I demonstrate that despite the clear
conceptual abstract distinction between contract and property damages,
the law has hard time determining which remedy is available when. The
problem arises because the same behavior—the same offense—can be
classified both as breach of contract and a violation of property. I survey
some of the rules that American law uses to divide the work between
contact and property law, and note a patterns of arbitrary and confused
distinctions.

         In the second part of the Article, I demonstrate another dichotomy
that compounds the problem of damage assessment: the timing of
measurement. Each damage measure—contract or property—can be
measure either ex post or ex ante. An ex post measure focus on the
expected value of the compensated interest as known at the time of the
violation, whereas the ex post measure provides added accuracy by
setting the damages equal to the actual value as known at the time of
trial.

         The third part of the Article uses economic analysis to evaluate the
effects of these fuzzy boundaries between contract and property damages,
and between ex post and ex ante damages. One of the most surprising
effects is the ability of a litigant to choose which remedy contract versus
property and which measurement methodology (ex post versus ex ante)
apply. If it is the plaintiff (the aggrieved party) who chooses, he is
effectively entitled to the greater of the two remedies. When the two
measure of recovery differ, these options to choose the greater-of or the
lesser-of the two available damages measures can be quite valuable. I
will also show that these options also create distorted incentives in
property and contractual relations.
Contract versus Property Remedies                                          5




     Let me briefly illustrate the insights of this paper through the simple
example of a violation of a copyright license. Imagine that the licensee
violated the license terms and distributed the materials owned by the
licensor through a medium that was not licensed. The violation had the
potential of both harming the owner and benefiting the violator, but the
magnitude of either effect was unknown at the time of violation. Assume
that the harm to the owner, measured by the lost profits, was $1000.
Assume, also, that at the time the violation, the benefit to the violator
from the unlicensed use, measured by the extra profits he made, was
uncertain, either $2000 or $0, each with equal probabilities. (This
uncertainty, too, would be resolved by the time the suit would reach
court, and evidence can be assembled regarding the actual profit
garnered by the violation). The expected benefit was, accordingly, $1000.
Notice that in this example, the expected profit equaled the expected
harm—the violation was neither efficient nor inefficient, ex ante.

     How would the law remedy this violation? If the remedy were
measured by the contractual rule of expectation damages, it would equal
$1000. If instead, the remedy were measure by the property rule of
restitution, it would equal the actual benefit that the violator/licensee
reaped. If this value turns out to be high—in our example, $2000—the
property owner would choose it over the contractual measure of $1000
and recover the full $2000. If, instead, the benefit turns out to be low—
$0—the property owner would choose the contractual measure instead,
and recover $1000. In all, the property owner would recover either
$2000 or $1000, each with equal likelihood, for an expected recovery of
$1500. This expected recovery exceeds either the expected loss to the
owner or the expected gain to the violator, because it is equal to the
greater of the two. In effect, the entitlement is worth more the owner
when violated!
6                                    《中研院法學期刊》第12期（2013年3月）



     How could this be? I will show in the article that the crucial
element in making this distorted measure of recovery happen is the
choice that a party has among competing measures of damages. This
choice embeds an option into the recovery rule, and bolsters it by the
value of the option.

     The question remains, though, how and why the law accords a party
the choice between two different measures of damages. I will show how
such regimes of multi-measures evolve, how they might be justified, and
why these justifications ultimately fail.

     Finally, I will end by listing some principles that can help shape a
rational policy of the election of remedies. In which situations should a
pure property measure apply, and in which should a pure contract
measure apply? How should we classify an offense—a property violation
or a contract breach?      Economic analysis suggests that the choice
between property violation and contract breach—as well as the associate
remedies—cannot be conducted along conceptual or mechanical tests.
The choice has to respond to the basic question: when are contract
damages insufficient to protect entitlements, and should be enhanced by
the greater property protection.



I. Property and Contract Remedies

A. Conversion of Property by Seller

     The first example of the tense line between breach of contract and
violation of property involves the protection of the rights of buyers in the
period between the date of the purchase and the final conveyance of the
Contract versus Property Remedies                                                      7




property to the buyer. In this interim stage, the buyer does not yet have a
perfected property right, although some seeds of property entitlement,
beyond the contractual right, already emerge. It is often said that the
seller continues to hold the legal title to the property “subject to an
                                                              1
equitable obligation to convey” it to the purchaser. In various cases of
real property purchase, for example, it was held that “the rights of the
purchaser are contract rights rather than rights of ownership of real
           2
property.”

     There are many ways in which the seller can breach the sale
contract, for example by failing to deliver in time or by damaging the
purchased goods. These breaches rarely implicate any property remedy,
and are addressed by damages for breach of contract, such as the
difference between the actual value and the promised value of the goods.
But one type of violation raises the remedial dichotomy and the
contract/property interface: The seller’s deliberate expropriation of value
from the asset prior to its delivery, in a way that both benefits the seller
and harms the buyer.

     Consider, for example, the case of Laurin v. DeCarolis
               3
Construction. A buyer entered a contract to purchase a wooded parcel
of real estate. Under the terms of the contract, the deed was to be
delivered six months after the execution of the contract. During these six
months, while he still held the property, the seller removed the majority
of the trees from the lot and 360 truckloads of gravel, and sold those for
a nice profit in the open market. These actions were ruled to be a breach


1 Barrell v. Britton, 244 Mass. 273, 278-279, 138 N.E. 579, 582 (1923); Kares v. Covell,
   180 Mass. 206, 209, 62 N.E. 244 (1902).
2 Laurin v. DeCarolis Construction, 72 Mass. 688, 363 N.E. 2d 675 (1977).
3 Laurin, 363 N.E. 2d 675.
8                                    《中研院法學期刊》第12期（2013年3月）



of contract, but the question the court had to address was the
measurement of damages. Is the buyer entitled to the contract damages,
here equal to the diminution of the property value? Or is the buyer
entitled to the substantially higher property remedy of disgorgement
damages, here equal to the benefit to the seller from the expropriation?

     This generic question is difficult for courts to resolve. In the Laurin
case, the trial court ruled that the buyer was the “equitable owner” of the
property and thus the conduct was a violation of property—the tort of
conversion—and awarded the buyer the higher measure of damages
equal to the value of the benefit to the seller. The court of appeals took a
different view: “as the plaintiffs were not in or entitled to possession of
the premises during the period when the gravel was removed therefrom
by the defendant, they are not entitled to the value of the gravel removed
on the theory of conversion which was employed by the master in
determining damages. [...] [T]he plaintiffs are entitled ... to the
diminution in the value of the land which was caused by the defendant's
                                       4
stripping and appropriation ... .”         The case then reached the
Massachusetts Supreme Court, which took yet another view: the buyer
was not an equitable owner, therefore the conduct was merely a breach
of contract, but nevertheless, due to the willful nature of the breach, the
buyer was entitled to disgorgement measure of damages—the value
                            5
appropriated from the land.

     Pragmatically, my reading of American common law suggests that
in cases like this—situations of deliberate breach of contract that verge



4 Id. at 677.
5 Id. at 678-79.
Contract versus Property Remedies                                                          9




on property violation—plaintiffs can choose the greater of the two
remedies, diminution-in-value of purchased asset versus the value to the
violator of the appropriated goods. The New York Court of Appeals
made this option explicit.6 The court recognized that there are two
possible scenarios. In the first scenario, the value of the material
removed from the land is low in comparison to the loss of value to the
land. In this scenario, the aggrieved buyer can recover the contract
remedy of diminution-in-value.7 As another court explained, “there was
substantial testimony that the lands the [plaintiffs] purchased were worth
$5000.00 less because of the [timber removed] by the [defendants]. Just
because the [defendants] sold the timber for a small amount of money
does not necessarily determine the measure of damages.” 8 In the
second scenario, the value of the materials removed from the land is
high in comparison to the loss of value to the land, and in this case the
aggrieved buyer can recover the disgorgement remedy.9 As explained by
the Massachusetts court, the disgorgement of profit remedy is available
because the violation “merely deprives the defendant of a profit
wrongfully made, a profit which the plaintiff was entitled to make.”10



6 See Worrall v. Munn, 53 N.Y. 185, 189-90 (N.Y. 1873).
7 Id. at 190. (“If the soil, having no value separated from the land, was stripped from
   [land], so as to render it unproductive and unfit for the use to which it was applied, the
   diminished value of the land would be the only adequate measure of compensation.
   So, also, where trees designed for shade or ornament have been cut down, whereby
   the value of the land has been greatly lessened.”)
8 Walker v. Dibble, 241 Ark. 692, 696 (Ark. 1966).
9 Id. (“Cutting a few trees on a timber tract, or taking a few hundred tons of coal from a
   mine, might not diminish the market value of the tract, or of the mine, and yet the
   value of the wood or coal, severed from the soil, might be considerable. The wrong-
   doer would, in the cases instanced, be held to pay the value of the wood and coal, and
   he could not shield himself by showing that the property from which it was taken was,
   as a whole, worth as much as it was before.”)
10 Laurin, 363 N.E. 2d 675.
10                                         《中研院法學期刊》第12期（2013年3月）



     Courts across the United States disagree whether such violations
constitute property infringement, contract breach, or both. But,
interestingly, when it comes to the remedy assessed for the violation,
courts do not pursue the conceptual implications of their classifications.
The Massachusetts Supreme court classified the infringed right as
contractual, but nevertheless granted a damage remedy, uncommon in
contractual cases, of disgorgement. This reflects a pattern: regardless of
the contract versus property classification of the offense, court are
relatively consistent in allowing the plaintiff to recover the greater of the
two remedies, contract versus property damages.

B. Breach of License v. Infringement of Intellectual Property

     The second example of the tense line between breach of contract
and violation of property involves unlicensed use of intellectual property.
Judge Benjamin Cardozo explained that

          [t]he author who suffers infringement of his copyright at the
          hands of a licensee may ... seek redress under the statute by
          action in the federal courts. But that is not in all circumstances
          the only remedy available. If the same act is not merely an
          invasion of the statutory right of property, but is also the breach
          of a contract ... he may count upon the breach or the abuse, and
                                      11
          have relief accordingly.

     The unauthorized use by the licensee could be both a breach of the
license contract and the resulting contract remedies, or an infringement
of the licensor’s intellectual property and the resulting property law
remedies. In copyright law, for example, the Copyright Act awards the


11 Underhill v. Schenck, 143 N.E. 773, 775 (N.Y. 1924).
Contract versus Property Remedies                                                      11



                                        12
owner the disgorgement remedy,               which could be substantially higher
than the normal contract damages that measure the rightholder’s lost
profits. In patent law, the shift from contract to infringement remedies
could also increase the magnitude of damages. Further, unlike contract
recovery, infringement of intellectual property opens the door to
                                                                            13
recovery of treble damages and attorneys’ fees in certain cases,                 as well
                                       14
as a longer statute of limitations.

      American courts have struggled to draw a clear line between the
two measures of recovery and determine which is available in any given
case. The rules determining when the aggrieved party is entitled to the
property remedy and when he is restricted to the contract remedy are
technical and almost arbitrary. For example, a key doctrinal distinction is
whether the license is exclusive or not. An exclusive license is regarded
as a transfer of the “ownership” of the copyright rights, and the exclusive
licensee—as the person who now “owns” some copyright rights—is
                                                                                      15
“incapable of infringing a copyright interest that is owned by him.”
He is only “capable of breaching the contractual obligations imposed on
                         16
him by the license.”          If, instead, the license were not exclusive, the
breaching licensee could be deemed a violator of someone else’s
                                                                    17
property and liable for copyright infringement damages.


12 See 17 U.S.C. § 504(b) (“The copyright owner is entitled to recover ... any profits of
   the infringer that are attributable to the infringement and are not taken into account
   in computing the actual damages.”).
13 See 35 U.S.C. §§ 283-85 (patent); 15 U.S.C. § 1117 (trademark); 17 U.S.C. §§ 502-05
   (copyright).
14 See Robert P. Merges, A Transactional View of Property Rights, 20 BERKELEY TECH.
   L.J. 1477, 1509 (2005).
15 Id. at 695, quoting Cortner v. Israel, 732 F.2d 267, 271 (2d Cir. 1984).
16 U.S. Naval Institute v. Charter Communications, 936 F.2d 695 (2d Cir. 1991).
17 See Sun Microsystems v. Microsoft Corp, 188 F.3d 1115, 1121 (9th Cir. 1999)
   (noting that generally a “copyright owner who grants a nonexclusive license to use
12                                        《中研院法學期刊》第12期（2013年3月）



     There are other ways courts determine whether the licensor is
entitled to contract versus property damages. If the licensee breaches a
promissory obligation under the license agreement, then it is breach of
contract and he is liable only for contract damages. If, on the other hand,
the licensee fails to satisfy a condition precedent, then the license is
deemed not to exist, and, in the absence of a license, the violator is liable
                               18
for infringement remedies.          Or, if the licensor is entitled to cancel the
contract in response to the breach, he may do so and, with the license no
longer in place, the only remaining ground for recovery is IP
infringement (that is, property damages). In fact, the same violation can
give rise to damages both for breach (prior to the license termination)
                                                                            19
and for infringement (for the period following termination).                     This
access to property damages becomes all the more secure if the license
itself contains a reversion clause that automatically terminates the
licensee’s rights (Richards, 2002).

     Finally, jurisdiction rules can affect the remedy. Federal courts have
exclusive jurisdiction over copyright infringement actions, whereas state
courts adjudicate contract disputes. When a complaint asserts breach of
license and infringement of copyright—does it arise under copyright law
                                                                           20
or under contract law? Does it go to Federal or state court?                    Many
courts hold that the complaint arises under the Copyright Act if it is for a


   his copyrighted material waives his right to sue the licensee for copyright
   infringement’ and can sue only for breach of contract”).
18 See, e.g., Graham v. James, 144 F.3d 229, 236-37 (2d Cir. 1998); Edwin E. Richards,
   Drafting Licenses to Guide Whether Potential Disputes Lie in Contract or
   Infringement, 7 COMPUTER L. REV. & TECH J. 45, 51-52 (2002).
19 See, e.g., Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation v. General Electric Co, 880 F.
   Supp. 1266, 1274-76 (E.D. Wis. 1995).
20 See generally James M. McCarthy, Comment, Federal Subject Matter Jurisdiction:
   When Does a Case Involving the Breach of a Copyright Licensing Contract “Arise
   Under” the Copyright Act?, 19 U. DAYTON L. REV. 165 (1993).
Contract versus Property Remedies                                                  13




remedy granted by the Act—a “well-pleaded complaint rule” that gives
                                     21
the plaintiff the outright choice.        This choice is constrained by a variety
of tests: whether the dispute is “informed by the substantive law of
               22                                                                23
copyright,”         or whether it is within the “subject matter of copyright.”

     As we see, this classification is difficult to resolve. The law entitles
the right holder to two types of remedies but does not draw a clear and
reasoned boundary between the causes of action. This means that in
many cases the owner would be effectively able to choose which remedy
to claim and could wait to plead the count that provides the higher
          24
recovery.

C. Breach of Fiduciary Contract

     A third example of the tense line between breach of contract and
violation of property involves the remedies for violations of fiduciary
obligations by an agent. An agent who violates his duties to the principal
(for example, by expropriating an amount of money entrusted to him in
the first place) is committing a breach of contract and can be charged
with damages equal to the value of the funds, had they remained in
principal’s account. This is the standard measure of expectation damages.
But if the agent receives a benefit through the violation of the duty of
loyalty (say, if the agent expropriates funds and invests them in his own


21 See T.B. Harms Co. v. Eliscu, 339 F.2d 823, 828 (2d Cir. 1964). Bassett v.
   Mashantucket Pequot Tribe, 204 F.3d 343, 355 (2d Cir. 2000).
22 SAPC, Inc. v. Lotus Development Corp., 699 F. Supp. 1009, 1012 (D. Mass. 1988).
23 La Resolana Architects, PA v. Clay Realtors Angel Fire, 416 F.3d 1195, 1199 n. 2
   (10th Cir. 2005).
24 Courts even permit plaintiffs to amend their complaints and shift the basis of
   recovery. See, e.g., Matarese v. Moore-McCormack Lines, Inc, 158 F.2d 631, 633
   (2d Cir. 1946); Frontier Management Co. v. Balboa Insurance Co., 658 F. Supp. 987,
   994 (D. Mass. 1986).
14                                        《中研院法學期刊》第12期（2013年3月）



account successfully), the principal is entitled to recover the entire
                                                 25
benefit obtained as result of the violation.

     For example, in Kelley v. Allin, the Massachusetts Supreme Court
held that a plaintiff had the right to choose between the value of property
entrusted to the fiduciary or the profit made by his wrongful act: “It was
for the plaintiff to elect whether to bring suit to compel a conveyance of
the property which the defendant acquired as the result of his dealings ...
or to hold him accountable for the gain which he made [from the
wrongful transaction].”26

     In this area of the law, there is no conceptual confusion regarding
the availability of the property-based remedy of disgorgement. As
explained by a New York court, “all profits and every advantage beyond
lawful compensation made by an agent in the business, or by dealing or
speculating with the effects of his principal, though in violation of his
duty of agent, and though the loss, if one had occurred, would have
fallen on the agent, are for the benefit of the principal.”27 The normative
case in favor of the stiffer property damages is also clear: “It is only by a
rigid adherence to this simple rule that all temptation can be removed
from one acting in a fiduciary capacity to abuse his trust, or seek his own
advantage in the position which it affords him.”28

     Nevertheless, the contract/property dichotomy reappears if the
disgorgement damages are low (or negative). Imagine a fiduciary who
expropriates funds from the client’s account and invests them under his
own account (or gambles with the money in a casino). If the fiduciary


25 Restatement (Second) of Agency §407.
26 Kelley v. Allin, 212 Mass. 327, 333 (Mass. 1912).
27 Dutton v. Willner, 52 N.Y. 312, 319 (N.Y. 1873).
28 Id.
Contract versus Property Remedies                                           15




earns a profit from this violation, it is duly disgorged. But if the fiduciary
loses the investment, the client can turn instead to contract damages and
recover the value that the funds, had the fiduciary performed his
obligations under the contract. The “principal [can] elect to get back the
thing improperly dealt with or to recover from the agent its value or the
amount of benefit which the agent has improperly received.”29

     Some state statutes have endorsed similar positions. For example,
a Colorado state statute involving trade secrets mandates that Damages
[for misappropriation of trade secrets] may include both the actual loss
caused by misappropriation and the unjust enrichment caused by
misappropriation that is not taken into account in computing actual
loss.30



II. Ex Post versus Ex Ante Measures of Damages

     The previous section identified a particular dichotomy in the law of
remedies—the interface between property and contract damages. In this
part, I discuss a second, unrelated, dichotomy—the interface between ex
post and ex ante damages. Once this second dichotomy is drawn out, the
remainder of the article will discuss the combined effect of the two.

     An ex post measures of damages is a rule that sets the magnitude of
recovery according to the actual realization of the protected interest. If,
say, the remedy is expectation damages, the ex post measure means the
actual lost profit suffered by the right holder, as assessed by court based


29 Tarnowski v. Resop, 236 Minn. 33, 38 (Minn. 1954).
30 COL REV STAT § 7-74-104(1). (2011).
16                                            《中研院法學期刊》第12期（2013年3月）



on all the information available after the fact (hence the term “ex post”).
Or, if the remedy is the disgorgement of benefit, the ex post measure
means the actual benefit reaped by the wrongdoer.

       Ex post measures serve the objective of “accuracy.” If the purpose
of a particular liability rule is to make a party “whole” based on some
conception of redress, then the ex post measure applies this redress in a
way that corresponds to the actual realization. A party who was injured
more recovers more.

       The law of remedies is replete with ex post measures of damages.
Tort law, usually, seeks to compensate the victim for the actual harm
suffered, as proven in court based on all the available evidence. Contract
law, often, seeks to award the aggrieved promise the actual lost profit, or
the consequential loss. Parties with different magnitudes of loss receive
different damages. Patent law, likewise, grants the patentee whose patent
was infringed a lost profit measure of damages that, at times, can be
highly idiosyncratic.

       An ex ante measure of damages, in contrast, is a rule that sets the
magnitude of the recovery according the information known prior to the
violation, before the actual realization of the loss or the benefit. It is an
expected value—a hypothetical quantum—equal to the average of the
possible ex post realizations. If, for example, the remedy is expectation
damages, the ex ante measure is the average anticipated lost profit. In a
breach of license case, it could be equal to hypothetical royalties that the
owner would have negotiated in a hypothetical license, had the infringer
                                                                 31
approached him and sought to secure a license.                        This hypothetical


31 35 U.S.C. § 284 (allowing the award of “damages adequate to compensate for the
     infringement, but in no event less than a reasonable royalty”). See, e.g., Panduit Corp.
Contract versus Property Remedies                                                       17




royalty measure is merely an educated guess—a mid-range point. It
reflects the expected value of the right to the parties and their relative
bargaining power, based on information that was available pre-
                32
infringement.

      The law is replete with ex ante measures of damages. In some areas
of tort law, plaintiffs cannot recover their actual loss but instead are
compensated according to tables and charts that are uniform across all
victims. For example, workers compensation in the United States, or
Social Security disability insurance, follow charts that apply fixed
damages, irrespective of actual harm. Even in contract law, an aggrieved
buyer can recover damages equal to the difference between the contract
price and the market price at the time of breach, which is an average way
to measure the actual loss.

      In some areas of the law, plaintiffs can choose among the ex post
and ex ante measures. In patent law, for example, the patentee can
choose between lost profit (ex post measure) and hypothetical royalty
(ex ante measure). In copyright law, the copyright holder can choose
between disgorgement of benefit (ex post measure) and statutory
damages (ex ante measure). In contract law, the aggrieved buyer can
choose between actual lost profits (ex post measure) and contract/market
differential damages (ex ante damages). Or, if a service provider is suing


   v. Stahlin Bros. Fibre Works, 575 F.2d 1152, 1157 (6th Cir. 1978) (“When actual
   damages, e.g., lost profits, cannot be proved, the patent owner is entitled to a
   reasonable royalty.”); Georgia-Pacific Corp. v. United States Plywood Corp., 318 F.
   Supp. 1116, 1120 (S.D.N.Y. 1970) (listing the factors relevant to the calculation of a
   reasonable royalty).
32 See Lucent Technology v. Gateway, 580 F.3d 1301, 1325, 1332 (Fed. Cir. 2009)
   (“The hypothetical negotiation tries, as best as possible, to recreate the ex ante
   licensing negotiation scenario and to describe the resulting agreement ... to elucidate
   how the parties would have valued the patented feature.”).
18                                   《中研院法學期刊》第12期（2013年3月）



the client for breach of contract after partial performance was already
done, he is entitled to restitution damages measured by the actual benefit
conferred to the breaching party (ex post damages) or by the
hypothetical fee that would be charged for such partial performance (ex
ante measure). In property law, a co-tenant or co-owner who invests in
updating the common property can recover the value of the
improvement (ex post measure) or the cost he incurred (ex ante measure).
The former is available under the “improvement” doctrine while the
latter is available under the “repairs” doctrine, but since many types of
updates could be classified as either improvement or repair, the law
effectively grants the investing party a choice.



III. The Distortive Effect of the Remedial Options

     What’s wrong with a fuzzy boundary between contract and property
damages? What’s wrong with an option to choose the greater of the ex
post and ex ante measures of damages? The analysis above shows the
difficulty of drawing a clear boundary between various remedies and
thus the ways different causes of action, and different ways to measure
them, overlap. This gives rise to a complex and sometimes messy body
of doctrine, which tries (sometimes arbitrarily) to distinguish the
grounds for various remedies. But my critique here will focus on a
different problematic aspect of the fuzzy boundary. When causes of
actions overlap, parties have the option to choose the remedy that is
more favorable. It is this option, I will argue, that can create distortions
in compensation and in the incentives of the parties.

     Return, now, to the example discussed in the introduction. It
Contract versus Property Remedies                                         19




considered a violation that could both harm the owner and benefit the
violator. It further assumed that the magnitude of either effect is
unknown at the time of violation, but becomes known by the time of trial.

     Case I: No benefit. Assume, first, that the violation creates no
benefit to the violator, but creates an expected harm (lost profit) of
$1000. After the fact, harm could be either high or low—either $1500 or
$500 with equal probabilities, and so on average it is equal $1000. Under
a pure ex post rule of expectation damages, the aggrieved party can
recover either $1500 or $500, depending on the actual loss. Under a pure
ex ante rule of expectation damages, the aggrieved party can recover
exactly $1000, regardless of whether the true harm is either $1500 or
$500. But what if the plaintiff can choose between the ex-post and ex-
ante measures of damages? What if, say, an aggrieved patent holder can
recover either the hypothetical royalty (the ex ante measure) of $1000, or
his actual lost profit, and can choose the greater of the two? In such case,
the plaintiff would choose the ex ante measure of $1000 when the actual
lost profit is lower (equal to $500), but would choose to recover the ex
post measure of actual lost profit when it is higher (equal to $1500). The
expected recovery is the average of $1000 and $1500, which equals
$1250. It is greater than the expected loss.

     Case II: No Harm. Assume, now, that the violation creates no harm
to the owner, but creates an expected benefit to the violator, of $1000.
After the fact, the benefit could be either high or low—either $2000 or
$0 with equal probabilities, and so on average it equals $1000. Under a
pure ex post rule of disgorgement damages, the aggrieved party can
recover either $2000 or $0, depending on the actual benefit. Under a
pure ex ante rule, the aggrieved party can recover exactly $1000,
regardless of whether the actual benefit is $2000 or $0. But what if the
20                                         《中研院法學期刊》第12期（2013年3月）



plaintiff can choose between the ex post and ex ante measures of
disgorgement damages? What if, say, a copyright owner can disgorge the
infringer’s actual profit, or—if this measure turns out to be too low (if
the infringer made no profit)—he can recover instead the statutory
                                                        33
damages under § 504(c) of the Copyright Act?                 If the benefit turns out
to be high, the aggrieved plaintiff would choose the ex post measure and
recover $2000. And if the benefit turns out to be low, the aggrieved
plaintiff would forgo the ex post measure and recover instead the ex ante
measure, equal to the average benefit of $1000. The expected recovery is
the average of $1000 and $2000, which equals $1500. It is greater than
the expected benefit.

       Case III: Fixed Benefit and Harm. Assume, next, that the violation
creates both a benefit and harm. As before, the harm will be either $1500
or $500, and the benefit either $2000 or $0, all with equal chances. It is
also assumed that the high/low realization of harm is independent of the
high/low realization of the benefit.

       Notice that the expected values of the harm and of the benefit are
$1000, which means that, from an ex ante perspective, the violation is
welfare-neutral. It is neither efficient nor inefficient. This is a special
case, but it is useful to consider it because it can help us see the presence
of a distortion in the measurement of damages that is independent of any
additional normative concern related to the effect of the violation on
total welfare.

       What will the plaintiff choose, if he had the option between contract


33 17 U.S.C. § 504(c)(1) (“[T]he copyright owner may elect ... to recover, instead of
     actual damages and profits, an award of statutory damages ... in a sum of not less
     than $750 or more than $30,000 as the court considers just.”).
Contract versus Property Remedies                                              21




and property damages, and in addition had the option between ex post
and ex ante damages? There is a 50% chance that the ex post benefit is
$2000, in which case the aggrieved plaintiff will choose the ex-post
disgorgement measure of $2000, regardless of how high the lost profit is
(which cannot exceed $1500). But there is also a 50% chance that the ex
post benefit is low, $0, in which case the plaintiff would have the option
to turn to the lost profit measure. If that measure turns out, ex post, to be
high ($1500), the plaintiff will choose to recover the ex post expectation
damage measure. But if the lost profit also turned out to be low, $500,
the plaintiff will abandon any ex post recovery measure and seek instead
the ex ante measure (of either benefit or lost profits, which are here
assumed to be equal), of $1000.

       The following table summarizes the plaintiff’s choice:
    Case         Benefit        Lost profit    Combined          Plaintiff’s
                                               probability        choice
    HH            $2000             $1500         25%              $2000
    HL            $2000             $500          25%              $2000
    LH             $0               $1500         25%              $1500
    LL             $0               $500          25%              $1000

(Case “HL” means High benefit and Low lost profit; and so on.)

       Notice that there is a 75% chance that the plaintiff will choose the
ex post measure (50% chance of ex-post disgorgement measure and 25%
ex post lost profit measure.) There is only a 25% chance that the plaintiff
will choose an ex ante measure, because the ex ante measure is
preferable only when both the benefit and the lost profit are low (case
LL).

       The table also helps us calculate the expected recovery for the
22                                    《中研院法學期刊》第12期（2013年3月）


                                           34
aggrieved plaintiff, which equals $1625.        It is higher than the expected
damages under either case I ($1250) or case II ($1500).

     In cases I and II, the excess recovery beyond the expected loss or
benefit was due to the option to choose the greater of the ex post or the
ex ante measures of the particular remedy. In case III, the excess
recovery is due to two confounding options: the option to choose the
greater of the contract or property damages, and the option to choose the
greater of their respective ex post and ex ante values.

     The effect of a “greater of” regime is distortive because the
portfolio of damages it creates ends up depending on arbitrary, irrelevant
factors. That is, violations that create the same expected harm or the
same expected benefits at the time they are committed end up with
different expected recoveries. To see why, look again at case I—where
the violation causes a stochastic lost profit, but no benefit. In the original
example, the lost profit was either $1500 or $500. Let’s call this case I.A,
and compare it to case I.B, which has the same feature of no-benefit, and
the same expected lost profit of $1000, but a different distribution:
instead of {$1500, $500}, assume that the lost profits are {$1100, $900}.
Namely, the High loss is not as high (only $1100, instead of $1500), but
the Low loss is also not as low ($900, instead of $500). The plaintiff will
continue to choose the ex post measure of damages when the lost profits
are high, and the ex ante measure of damage when the lost profits are
low, but now the expected value of this recovery portfolios is only $1050,
lower than it was in case I.A ($1250).

     What’s going on? What is the pattern that explains these results?



34 ¼×2000＋¼×2000＋¼×1500＋¼×1000 = 1625.
Contract versus Property Remedies                                          23




The choice of remedy regime entitles the owner to recover the actual
realized value bundled with a put option to sell this right to the violator
for the ex ante value of $1,000. The excess recovery under this regime
equals the value of the put option. The more volatile the ex post value of
the asset—case I.A is more volatile than case I.B because the variance of
{$1500, $500} is greater than the variance of {$1100, $900}—the more
valuable the put option and the larger the excess recovery enjoyed by the
plaintiff. The expected recovery depends not only on the expected value
of the measure, but also its volatility.

     Thus, in case II, the recovery exceeded that of Case I (either I.A or
I.B) because the volatility of the benefit was greater than the volatility of
the lost profit. And in case III the recovery was the highest because the
expected value of $1000 was bolstered by two, rather then one,
options—the option to choose benefit based versus lost-profit based
recovery, and the option to choose ex post versus ex ante measures of
each remedy.

     These embedded options to choose the more favorable damage
measure—contract versus property, and ex-post versus ex-ante—
increase the recovery beyond the amount that is needed to protect the
violated interest. It is possible that this increased recovery is useful to
overcome what might otherwise be sub-optimal damages. For example,
if for some reason the aggrieved party does not enforce his rights in
every case of violation, a “multiplier” is necessary to offset the lower
enforcement effort and maintain optimal deterrence. But this “imperfect
enforcement” rationale does not seem to explain the patterns of the law.
The option to choose contract versus property damages arises when there
is a contract. In a non-contractual setting, when one’s property is
violated, the only damages are the property measure. Is there any reason
24                                  《中研院法學期刊》第12期（2013年3月）



to expect that the presence of a contract would serve to reduce the
probability of enforcement and thus justify a damages multiplier relative
to the non-contractual case? If at all, it would seem that the presence of
contract makes the identity of the violator known and the likelihood of
enforcement higher, reducing the need for any multiplier. And so the
option to choose a different damage measure creates a multiplier where
it is least needed.

     Moreover, an option to choose the greater of two remedies is a poor
way to set a damages multiplier. If the reason to multiply damages is the
low probability of detection, this—and not the value of the option—
should be the multiplying criterion. Why should violations that create a
higher variance of effects (where, we saw, the option value is higher) be
punished more severely? If anything, the more profitable the violation is
to the violator, the more likely it is to lead to enforcement. When the
owner sees that the violator profited well from the violation, the owner is
more likely to sue and seek a disgorgement remedy. Thus, violations that
create high variance of benefits (small chance of very high profits) may
be more likely to end up with a disgorgement suit. And with the higher
likelihood of suit, there is less need for a damage multiplier. The choice
of remedy scheme is worth more in cases of high detection probability—
contrary to the deterrence rationale. And so, again, the option to choose
creates a larger multiplier where a smaller one is needed, and vice versa.



IV. Impaired Liability Rules

     There is perhaps a good explanation for the pattern of remedy
options that private law accords the aggrieved owner. As we saw, these
Contract versus Property Remedies                                          25




options create a regime of super-compensatory damages. But there is a
way that the violator can avoid the burden of such overcompensation: he
can negotiate the right to commit the unauthorized use. To avoid the
harsh “greater-of” sanction, a potential violator would contract for the
right—would negotiate and secure a paid-for license. When the costs of
negotiating a license are lower than the cost of dispute resolution, such
incentive is desirable.

     For example, the seller who wants to strip the land from trees and
gravel after selling it to the buyer may negotiate for this right rather than
unilaterally haul away the goods. Or, a copyright licensee who wants to
engage in additional, non-authorized uses would renegotiate the original
license to expand the permitted uses.        Or, a client who wishes to
terminate a service contract prematurely can negotiate compensation for
the disappointed service provider, rather than unilaterally breach pay
restitution damages. In these settings, and in numerous others, the law
correctly channels parties to engage in transactions, rather than act
unilaterally. Call options on other people’s property are fairly rare.

     Of course, there are situations in which diverting parties to a
consensual negotiation would be undesirable, because such negotiations
are too costly and difficult to conduct. This question—when is a voluntary
transaction superior to a unilateral compensated violation—is an ages-
old fundamental inquiry. It is the familiar “property rules versus liability
rules” dichotomy. This is a normative dilemma that may be settled by
reference to transactions costs, or to defensive costs, or to notions of
liberty and autonomy, or according to a framework distributive justice.
Nothing in the analysis of this paper implicates such normative inquiry
or contributes to the body of thinking about the proper division of labor
among property rules and liability rules.
26                                  《中研院法學期刊》第12期（2013年3月）



     What the analysis did demonstrate, however, is the inadvertent
impairment of liability rules. Imagine that, for any given set of reasons,
it is determined that the optimal way to protect an entitlement is by a
liability rule. Perhaps because transactions costs or coordination costs
are too high; or because some owners are too wealthy and stubborn and
are unwilling to sell usage rights at reasonable prices; or because some
people have dire and urgent needs that would be undermined if
channeled to market transactions. A liability rule is thus set in place and
a “price” for the violation is tagged, so that one-sided violations may
occur in the desired set of circumstances. Unfortunately, the effect of the
options described in this article is to distort the “price.” The violator
would have to pay, not the price the law intended to set, but a higher,
“inadvertent,” price that reflects the option that the owner has to choose
among the various legal ways to measure this price. The law perhaps
intended to grant the owner a compensation based on one of several
ways to measure his loss. But the law did not mean to bolster the
compensation in an arbitrary way that reflects something different than
the loss (or gain), but rather reflects only the option value—that is, the
variance of the distribution of harms.

     The inadvertent increase in expected compensation could be benign,
if the violator would continue to behave in the same way even under in
the presence of costlier remedies. There would be a redistributive effect,
but not necessarily a chilling incentive effect. This is the same
redistributive effect that property rules accomplish—they let owners
extract more of the surplus from violators. But the inadvertent increase
in expected compensation could also increase deterrence. Some
violations would not occur and some violators would have to go through
the more expensive routes of negotiated transfers. If a liability rule were
Contract versus Property Remedies                                        27




deemed desirable, the unintended effect of the remedial dichotomies is to
transform it into a property rule.



Conclusion

       This Article identified two options that owners have in seeking
remedies. The first is the choice between contract and property damages.
This dichotomy arises in situation in which the owner and the violator
have a contractual relationship, and the violator overstepped his rights in
a way that is more severe than mere contract breach. The second option
is the choice between accurate ex post damages based on the realization
of the infringed value and average ex ante damages based on some
measure that is independent of the actual realization. Both options arise
from     the   unclear    boundaries   between    remedial    rules.   The
contract/property fuzzy boundary is due to the difficulty of
distinguishing breach and infringement. The ex post versus ex ante fuzzy
boundary is due to the portfolio of remedies that are available to
aggrieved parties.

       These options arise without courts ever noticing them. For the same
violation, a party may bring a claim for property remedy, or for ex post
measure of damages, only because some realization of harm or benefit
turned out, by chance, to be high. A court adjudicating this claim is not
positioned to recognize the ex ante distribution of harms or benefits, and
to recognize that an implicit exercise of a remedial option occurred. As
far as I know, courts have never noticed the over-compensation effect
that is due to the embedded options.

       As long as the law is wedded to an approach of a menu of remedies,
28                                 《中研院法學期刊》第12期（2013年3月）



such results are probably inevitable. The way to overcome this distortion
is to thin down the menu of remedial choices. For example, if remedies
were always based on ex ante measures, then the option to choose the
greater of the ex post and ex ante damages would be eliminated. But for
this solution to arise, the law has to abandon the strong held notions of
the importance of “accuracy” in the assessment of damages.
Contract versus Property Remedies                                   29




                                    References

Ben-Shahar, Omri. 2011. Damages for Unlicensed Use. University of
     Chicago Law Review 78:7-29.
Ben-Shahar, Omri, and Robert A. Mikos. 2005. The (Legal) Value of
     Chance: Distorted Measures for Recovery in Private Law. American
     Law and Economics Review 7:484-522.
McCarthy, James M. 1993. Comment, Federal Subject Matter Jurisdiction:
     When Does a Case Involving the Breach of a Copyright Licensing
     Contract “Arise Under” the Copyright Act?. University of Dayton
     Law Review 19:165-196.
Merges, Robert P. 2005. A Transactional View of Property Rights.
     Berkeley Technology Law Journal 20:1477-1520.
Richards, Edwin E. 2002. Drafting Licenses to Guide Whether Potential
     Disputes Lie in Contract or Infringement. Computer Law Review
     and Technology Journal 7:45-64.
