  Comparative Administrative Law in Asia
Academia Sinica Law Journal                                                    53
Issue 19, pp. 53-97 (Sep. 2016)




  Introducing the Precautionary Principle
                                 ＊
        into Administrative Law:
             Facing the Challenges to the Rule of Law

                                              ＊＊
                                  Jin Zining


                                   Abstract
      With risk being one of the most prominent characteristics of
modern society, risk regulation has become one of the most important
functions of government. The precautionary principle has appeared in
the statutes of many countries, showing effort by legislators to integrate
risk regulation into administrative law. However, many issues that have
emerged in the application of the precautionary principle show that risk
precaution creates serious challenges to the traditional ideas of the rule
of law. Ideas from “soft law” and the “participatory model of public
administration” suggest new institutional mechanics which could
reconcile to certain extent the practical need for risk regulation with the
normative requirements of the rule of law. In this perspective, more
importance should be assigned to “risk communication” when
structuring the precautionary principle.

KEYWORDS: precautionary principle, precaution, rule of law,
          participatory model of public administration, soft law.



＊  Submission Date: May 21, 2015; Acceptance Date: January 13, 2016. [Line Editor:
   Hui-Chi Wang].
＊＊ Associate Professor, School of Transnational Law, Peking University.
   Online: http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/92805161.pdf.
54                                       《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）



                                     Contents

    Introduction
    1. The Rise of the Precautionary Principle
    2. The Precautionary Principle Is Challenging the Rule of Law
        (1) The Precautionary Principle and Regulators’ Discretion
        (2) The Precautionary Principle and the Burden of Proof
        (3) The Unavoidable But Not Necessarily Accusable Regulatory “Errors”
    3. The Potential of Traditional Mechanisms for Meeting the Challenges
        (1) Rules and Standards
        (2) Examination and Supervision
    4. Emerging Mechanisms to Reconcile Precaution with the Rule of Law
        (1) Soft Law
        (2) Participatory Model of Administration
        (3) Further Discussion: To Democratize Risk Regulation?
    5. Structuring the Precautionary Principle under the Rule of Law
    6. Conclusion




Introduction

       Risk regulation has become an essential governmental function as
risk associated with modern science and technology has increased over
time. In the meantime, the question of how to warrant the practice of risk
regulation under the rule of law has become a prominent issue that
legislators, judges, lawyers and researchers now face. As an attempt to
respond to this problem, the precautionary principle has appeared widely
                                                   1
in both international law and domestic law. And there remains an on-


1    Center for the Study of Law Science and Technology, Arizona State University
     College of Law, From General Policy to Legal Rule, 111(14) ENVTL. HEALTH PERSP.
Introducing the Precautionary Principle into Administrative Law                   55


              2
going debate over its legal implications and when/how it is supposed to
be applied.

     Many critics and advocates of the precautionary principle have
disagreed on the technical details of its application or focused on the
differences in how the precautionary principle is specifically interpreted
                                                 3
and applied across areas and jurisdictions. These bodies of scholarship
provide valuable insight into the practical implementation of the
precautionary principle, but there remains a gap in the literature that this
article aims to fill. That is, to theoretically understand the change itself
that risk precaution has been widely accepted as government function
and that the precautionary principle has been introduced into the
normative system of administrative law. The lack of integrated
understanding of this change from the big picture perspective makes it
seem very easy for the specific “counter-measures” to fall into
                          4
paradoxical situations. Considering this danger, this article is designed
to explore the change itself from a wider theoretical perspective,
focusing on the tensions between the precautionary principle and the rule
of law, which underpin all the on-going debates over the application of
the precautionary principle. While the ways in which the tensions have
been perceived and addressed vary significantly across jurisdictions, the


  1799, 1799-802 (2003).
2 See, e.g., Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle, 151 U. PA. L. REV.
  1003 (2003); David A. Dana, A Behavioral Economic Defense of the Precautionary
  Principle, 97 NW. U. L. REV. 1315 (2003); Gregory N. Mandel & James Thuo Gathii,
  Cost Benefit Analysis Versus the Precautionary Principle: Beyond Cass Sunstein’s
  Laws of Fear, 5 U. ILL. L. REV. 1037 (2006).
3 See JONATHAN B. WIENER, MICHAEL D. ROGERS, JAMES K. HAMITT & PETER H. SAND,
  THE REALITY OF PRECAUTION: COMPARING RISK REGULATION IN THE UNITED STATES
  AND EUROPE (2011).
4 See Frank B. Cross, Paradoxical Perils of the Precautionary Principle, 53 WASH. &
  LEE L. REV. 851, 859 (1996).
56                                    《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


substantive issues arising from these tensions are fairly universal.

       In this article, I analyze the transformation that risk regulation has
undergone during the incorporation of precautionary principle into
administrative law, then discuss how the issues’ emergence through the
adoption and application of the precautionary principle actually reflect
challenges to traditional ideas of the rule of law in the context of risk
         5
society. In this part, I argue there is a “crisis of legitimacy” due to the
tension between the practice of precaution in risk regulation and the
basic ideas of the rule of law. I then explore legal mechanisms which
could deal with the tensions between precaution in risk regulation and
the rule of law. I also show that “soft law” can help address both the rule
of law and precaution in risk regulation; the general public is able to
make a difference in reconciling the rule of law with risk regulation
through their participation in public administration; and the reason these
two mechanisms do better than traditional mechanisms in dealing with
uncertainty is the fact that both of them have disrupted the information
monopoly that regulators possess. Based on the analyses and findings, I
also take the Communication from the European Commission on the
Precautionary Principle (2000) as an example to show how the
theoretical analysis in the former sections could help us better structure
the precautionary principle.




5    See ULRICH BECK, RISK SOCIETY: TOWARDS A NEW MODERNITY (1992) (hereinafter
     BECK, RISK SOCIETY); ULRICH BECK, WORLD RISK SOCIETY (1999) (hereinafter
     BECK, WORLD RISK SOCIETY).
Introducing the Precautionary Principle into Administrative Law                     57


1. The Rise of the Precautionary Principle

     Risk is everywhere and has always been. We can imagine our
distant ancestors walking through jungles carefully, knowing there were
leopards, tigers or wolves nearby; or they could be resting in caves
worrying about drought, flood and epidemics. However, the concept of
risk exists only in the modern world. Traditional cultures didn't have the
concept of risk because “they didn't need one.” They instead “perceived
things as fate, luck or the wills of the gods where we now tend to
                  6
substitute risk.” The difference is that we do not think we can control
“fate/luck/god’s will,” but we do believe we are able to manage “risk”.
This shift has been found to be related to the modern notion of human
beings’ ability to control or strongly influence the future, which can
                                                                                     7
arguably be seen as viewing the future as a man-made product.
Therefore, it is not surprising that we couldn’t find the precautionary
principle dealing with risks in ancient Roman law.

     Emerging in European environmental law in the late 1970s, the
precautionary principle has rapidly become enshrined within numerous
international treaties and declarations. Now the application of the
precautionary principle has grown beyond the area of environmental
                      8                                  9
risks regulation          and international law.             Application of the
precautionary principle has now expanded to labor protection, food


6 ANTHONY GIDDENS, RUNAWAY WORLD: HOW GLOBALIZATION IS RESHAPING OUR
  LIVES 22-23 (2d ed. 2003).
7 For the historic evolution of the conception of risk in western Europe, see generally
  DEBORAH LUPTON, RISK (1999).
8 PHILIPPE SANDS, PRINCIPLES OF INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL LAW 266 (2d ed.
  2003).
9 Owen McIntyre & Thomas Mosedale, The Precautionary Principle as a Norm of
  Customary International Law, 9 J. ENVTL. L. 221, 235 (1997).
58                                           《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


                                                                   10
safety and information technology regulation, etc. The precautionary
principle has also appeared frequently in the statutes and case laws of
many nations while the idea of precaution serves as a basis for some
provisions of legislation and regulations without referring directly to the
term, “precautionary principle.” An example of this is Article 21 of
China’s Regulation on Environmental Impact Assessment of Planning of
2009, stipulating that: the reviewing group should give “disapproval”
advice “if they cannot make a scientific judgment on the scope and
degree of possible adverse environmental effects in the light of the
existing knowledge.” It is the first time for China to incorporate the
                                                                                  11
precautionary principle into national legislation and regulations.

      Interpretations of the precautionary principle vary from “where
potential adverse effects are not fully understood or the activities should
                 12
not proceed”          to “where there are threats of serious or irreversible
damage, or where the lack of full scientific certainty should not be used
as a reason for postponing measures to prevent environmental



10 See, e.g., Article 7 of General Food Law, Regulation (EC) No.178/2002: “In specific
   circumstances where, following an assessment of available information, the
   possibility of harmful effects on health is identified but scientific uncertainty persists,
   provisional risk management measures necessary to ensure the high level of health
   protection chosen in the Community may be adopted, pending further scientific
   information for a more comprehensive risk assessment”. See also Claudia Som et al.,
   The Precautionary Principle as a Framework for a Sustainable Information Society,
   85(3) J. BUS. ETHICS 493 (2009).
11 In 1979, the Environmental Protection Law of PRC (for Trial Implementation)
   established the principle of “prevention dominating, integrating pollution prevention
   in advance and pollution control afterwards”, which is literally close to precautionary
   principle while according to the words of the provision and the generally accepted
   interpretation, it is equivalent to the prevention principle (not the precautionary
   principle) in international environmental law.
12 General Assembly Resolution on the World Charter of Nature, U.N. Doc. A/37/51
   (1982), at 17.
Introducing the Precautionary Principle into Administrative Law                        59


                 13
degradation,”         and so on. Nevertheless, from the perspective of
administrative law, when we focus solely on the administrative power,
no matter how diverse or even contradictory in specifics, one prominent
and widely accepted form of incorporating the precautionary principle
into positive law is legislators authorizing regulators to take
precautionary measures when there are threats of harm to human health
or the environment, even if certain scientific uncertainty persists.
Granting of such authorization is dependent on several clearly definable
factors. A close look at these factors will show that the rise of risk
regulation as a governmental function is inevitable.

      The most notable factor may be the perception of risk in modern
society that relates risks to our decisions and actions. Prior to
industrialization, pre-modern societies tended to view natural disasters as
“strokes of fate” and accusations were directed against the “gods” or
“God.” In contrast, modern societies tend to view natural disasters as
“nature’s vengeance,” which suggests that these disasters are the
unwelcome results of human decisions and actions. In this case, the ones
who made the decisions and executed the actions should take blame;
hence “the problem of social accountability and responsibility
                       14
irrevocably arises.”

      There are still other relevant factors worth noting. First, the public
awareness of risk itself can incite feelings of distress and insecurity. With
the reflexive characteristic of modern society, such feelings could


13 Bergen Conference, Bergen Ministerial Declaration on Sustainable Development in
   the ECE Region (May 16, 1990). U.N.Doc. A/CONF.151/PC/10 (1990), Annex I at
   19.
14 Ulrich Beck, From Industrial Society to the Risk Society: Questions of Survival, Social
   Structure and Ecological Enlightenment, 9(1) THEORY CULTURE SOC. 97, 98 (1992) .
60                                       《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


prompt the general public to call for risk management. And for the good
of social order, it might be reasonable for governments to take actions
when there is panic, even though the public’s worries were probably
                                                                          15
shaped by “intuitive toxicology” along with “misconceptions.”

       Second, modern governments are no longer small governments.
After the welfare state began providing care from womb to tomb, the
                                                                 16
role of government has transformed significantly.                     Although the
continuing trend of worldwide public administration reform that began
in the 1970s and the 1980s is to downsize government, the state’s basic
                                                               17
duties to safeguard its nationals are not removed.                  When scientific
uncertainties are found to threaten public health and well-being,
government is naturally expected to take measures against them.

       Third, the image of the person in legal systems has changed. In the
liberal legal system, the “person” is presumed to be a reasonable, free-
willed, “strong and wise” actor. As negative impacts of this presumption
were discovered, characteristics of the typical individual found in the
real world began to be taken into consideration. The image of the “weak
                                                                               18
and unwise” individual has been recognized in the legal system.                     This
image legitimizes the choice of individuals apprehensive of risks to turn
toward government for help.



15 CASS R. SUNSTEIN, RISK AND REASON: SAFETY, LAW AND THE ENVIRONMENT 1, 35-36
     (2002).
16 See DWIGHT WALDO, THE ADMINISTRATIVE STATE (1948).
17 Jin Zining, Reflection on the Privatization of Public Law: Against the Background of
   the Worldwide Public Administration Reform, 5 ZHEJIANG ACAD. J. 143, 143-50
   (2007)（金自宁，“公法私法化”诸观念反思—以公共行政改革运动为背景，
   浙江学刊，5期，页143-150（2007年）              ）.
18 See EIICHI HOSHINO, PERSON IN PRIVATE LAW (2004)（星野英一著，王闯译，私法
   中的人（2004年）       ）.
Introducing the Precautionary Principle into Administrative Law                61


2. The Precautionary Principle Is Challenging the
   Rule of Law

      The rule of law is the core of the massively broad and complex
system of administrative law. From a historical perspective, taking
traditionally accepted ideas regarding the rule of law, administrative
action intruding into private liberty could be legitimatized under the
premise that the administrate power given to agencies controlling private
conduct must be authorized by the legislature. Agencies must then
exercise the powers delegated to them in accordance to legislative
requirements. On this premise, the agency plays the role of merely a
                       19
“transmission belt”          to implement legislative directives. When the
discretionary power of an agency expands too broadly and rapidly, a
large amount of administrative activities cannot be legitimatized under
the “transmission belt” theory. It is here where arose a new notion
arguing that such discretionary power could be justified by the idea of
             20
“expertise” —specialized professional knowledge and skill needed for
achieving an agency’s goals for the public good—which the legislature
does not have.

      Regardless of whether it’s clearly stated or not, the ongoing
discussion over the precautionary principle in legal academia continues
to take place in the background and is to some extent based on the
normative requirements of the rule of law.

      However, there is evidence showing that the practices of the



19 Richard B. Stewart, The Reformation of American Administrative Law, 88 HARV. L.
   REV. 1667, 1675 (1975).
20 Id. at 1678.
62                                     《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


precautionary principle in risk regulation present severe challenges to the
long-standing ideas of the rule of law. In this section, it will be argued
that: Precaution in risk regulation can acquire its legitimacy neither
through implementing delegating statutes set by the legislature, nor
relying on the scientific data provided by experts. Therefore, there is a
“crisis of legitimacy” due to this tension between the practice of risk
regulation and the basic ideas of the rule of law. It becomes more evident
when we look at the specific issues brought forth in the following
regarding the ongoing debate between critics and advocates of the
precautionary principle.

(1) The Precautionary Principle and Regulators’ Discretion
     The precautionary principle has been accused of being “vague” or
               21
“too broad.”         According to this kind of criticism, “because the
precautionary principle can be of any meaning, so it actually means
                    22
nothing at all.”         However, advocates of the precautionary principle
have argued that such criticism is exaggerated. As an example, we
examine two of the most widely recognized forms of the precautionary
principle.

     The Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (June 14,
        23
1992)        provides: “In order to protect the environment, the
precautionary approach shall be widely applied by States according to
their capabilities. Where there are threats of serious or irreversible
damage, lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for
postponing      cost-effective     measures       to   prevent   environmental


21 See Sunstein, supra note 2, at 1003.
22 Dana, supra note 2, at 1315.
23 Principle 15, U.N. Doc. A/CONF.151/5 (1992).
Introducing the Precautionary Principle into Administrative Law                  63


degradation.”

     The Wingspread Statement on the precautionary principle (Jan. 26,
      24
1998)      defines the precautionary principle as: “When an activity raises
threats of harm to human health or the environment, precautionary
measures should be taken even if some cause and effect relationships are
not fully established scientifically. In this context the proponent of an
activity, rather than the public, should bear the burden of proof.”

     These two statements have been respectively termed the weak and
                                                    25
strong versions of precautionary principle.              Other statements of the
precautionary principle, by and large, can be located somewhere
between these two extremes. Although there are significant differences
between these two versions at each extreme, it would be very difficult to
prove either one of them as so “vague” that they “can be of any
meaning.” At a glance, we can easily tell that according to the former
one, only when there are threats of serious or irreversible damage,
precautionary measures should be taken. In addition, government should
also weigh the costs and benefits of the measures taken. However,
according to the latter strong version, these two perquisites are not
required.

     Of course, legal principles are usually far from being as specific as
rules, and the precautionary principle is not exceptional. It might not tell
the regulators what to do exactly in specific cases. However, this does
not mean it cannot play a role as a legal principle. In this sense,



24 Wingspread Conference on the Precautionary Principle (Jan. 26, 1998), http://www.
   sehn.org/wing.html.
25 Per Sandin, Dimensions of the Precautionary Principle, 5(5) HUM. ECOLOGICAL RISK
   ASSESSMENT 889, 889-907 (1999).
64                                     《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


vagueness itself should not be a problem.

       However, there are some justifiable concerns behind the
accusations of over vagueness found in the precautionary principle. For
example, the idea that “the more open the meaning, the larger the room
                                                      26
for contentious and self-serving interpretations”          is worthy of concern.
Since adopting the precautionary principle into positive law means that
legislators would grant agencies the power to take precautionary
measures, the uses of indeterminate terms in the precautionary principle,
such as “threat” (strong version), “irreversible” damage (weak version),
“full scientific certainty” (weak version) or “fully established
scientifically” (strong version), leave great room for discretion and thus
are points of concern. Under such light, responses to the criticism of
“vagueness” of the precautionary principle, which seek to specify the
implications of the precautionary principle, including clarifying the
                                                      27
premises and the procedures of its application,            are actually trying to
limit the discretionary power delegated to risk regulators.

       Traditionally, agency action preventing various hazards is based on
past experience and existing knowledge. Usually, administrators are able
to not only know the sources of the hazard and the severity of its impacts
but also how to prevent or remedy it. So legislators could authorize
agencies the power to take actions within a clear operating structure
under particular conditions.

       However, this certainty no longer exists in the risks faced by


26 Christopher D. Stone, Is There a Precautionary Principle?, 31(7) ENVTL. L. REP.
     NEWS & ANALYSIS 10790, 10797 (2001).
27 See, e.g., Center for the Study of Law Science and Technology, Arizona State
     University College of Law, supra note 1; Noah M. Sachs, Rescuing the Strong
     Precautionary Principle from Its Critics, 4 U. ILL. L. REV. 1285 (2011).
Introducing the Precautionary Principle into Administrative Law                 65


modern society. What the precautionary principle must confront are
threats that involve largely unknown potential damage that is likely
irreversible and very remote in time and space. Hence legislators are
unable to make detailed contingency plans in advance when they
authorize agencies the power to take various precautionary actions.
Legislators must authorize agencies the power to take precautionary
actions without specific standards. The consequence is that regulators
may make their own judgments and decisions when faced with
uncertainty, and this also formally allows a wide range of legal actions
that may be taken. In such a case, it is highly possible that risk regulators
could abuse the discretionary power delegated to them by legislators,
resulting in a serious threat to fundamental ideas of the rule of law.

     Given that precautionary measures to be taken in the real world
usually involve some kind of restrictions on individuals’ rights and
liberties and prohibitions on certain risky activities. For example, a
chlorine ban would force many chemical industries to make major
                                                      28
changes in the productions or even shut down.              Due to the fact that the
risk regulator’s legal power is not authorized with specific standards, the
restrictions as precautionary measures imposed on the regulated will
become “open-ended,” thereby the precaution can be the start of a
slippery slope towards a terrifying end where individual rights and
liberty may be totally stripped away. In this situation, the regulators are
put entirely at the mercy of the regulatory agencies. That could be
everything but the rule of law.




28 See Alana M. Fuierer, The Anti-Chlorine Campaign in the Great Lakes: Should
   Chlorinated Compounds Be Guilty Until Proven Innocent?, 43 BUFF. L. REV. 181
   (1995).
66                                      《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


(2) The Precautionary Principle and the Burden of Proof
     One well-known idea of the traditional understanding of the rule of
law is: there should be no restrictions on individual’s freedom unless
hazards are proven. This means that the agency should bear the burden
of proof for taking restricting action. U.S. Administrative Procedure Act
of U.S. (1946) provides: “Except as otherwise provided by statute, the
proponent of a rule or order has the burden of proof .… No sanction
shall be imposed or rule or order be issued except upon consideration of
the whole record or such portions thereof as may be cited by any party
and as supported by and in accordance with the reliable, probative, and
                         29
substantial evidence.”        The Administrative Litigation Law of PRC (中
华人民共和国行政诉讼法) even provides that, the agency (defendant)
shall bear the burden of proof for all kinds of administrative action
         30
taken,        and provide evidence and regulatory documents based on
which administrative action was taken. In other words, the agency is
supposed to base all of their actions on ample proof.

     However, as noted above, precautionary actions are aimed not at
things that have already happened, but things that will possibly happen.
What the risk regulator is supposed to prove is not that something
happened in the past but that something might happen in the future.
When the potential of a hazard occurrence or causal relationships is
unknown, it’s extremely difficult, sometimes impossible, for the agency
to prove that some hazards exist or that some damage will occur. If we
stick to the traditional idea of the rule of law, which requires agencies to
wait until scientists find proof of causation or scientific proof that some


29 Administrative Procedure Act of 1946, 5 U.S.C. §556 (d) (1946).
30 XINGZHENG SUSONG FA (Administrative Litigation Act) art. 34 (2014) (China).
Introducing the Precautionary Principle into Administrative Law              67


damage will occur, no precautionary actions would ever be justified
under these requirements. In other words, risk regulation would be
paralyzed with the burden of proof, and regulators might find themselves
in a quandary over whether to take action to protect the public while
violating the rules or sticking to the rule of taking no action without
unquestionable proof and forsaking their duty to protect the public.

     There are many formulations of the precautionary principle, and
these different expressions take a “better safe than sorry” stance to lessen
the regulatory agencies’ burden of proof, moving from a traditional
position to a new one in which the agency may take reasonable or
necessary measures even if scientific uncertainty persists. In the context
of the Wingspread Statement (1998), mentioned above as the most well-
known example of the “strong” version of the precautionary principle,
“the proponent” of a risky activity “should bear the burden of proof” to
prove the activity is safe, rather than the agency having to prove that its
precautionary measures taken are necessary. In its strong formulations,
the precautionary principle can be interpreted as calling for absolute
proof of safety. For example, the World Charter for Nature states, “where
potential adverse effects are not fully understood, the activities should
               31
not proceed.”

     However, the other side of the coin is that if we required the actors
engaged in risky activities to prove the activities to be taken are safe, it
takes a “guilty until proven innocent” stance, which is directly in conflict
                                                                       32
with the other stance of “innocent until proven guilty.”                    And


31 World Charter for Nature, U.N. GA Resolution 37/7 (1982).
32 Henk van den Belt, Debating the Precautionary Principle: “Guilty until Proven
   Innocent” or “Innocent until Proven Guilty”?, 132(3) PLANT PHYSIOLOGY 1122,
   1124 (2003).
68                                        《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


considering the fact that no one can predict all possible future effects of
a certain activity, neither can anyone prove that certain action to be taken
will be absolutely safe. The burden of proof in this theoretical context, if
placed on the regulated, would result in a complete loss of individuals’
freedom of action: because all actions to be taken could be risky in some
way and it’s impossible for an advocate to prove that they offer no
possible harm.

       It’s impossible to decide a specific either-or distribution for burden
of proof in this context. The right question is, as Elizabeth Fisher has
                  33
pointed out,           whether the burden of proof is applicable in the area of
risk regulation, considering our future is uncertain and the key element
of precautionary action is that it is based on anticipation of the future in
the absence of scientific certainty. When some activity is not yet
appearing, nobody—neither the regulators nor the regulated—can bear
the burden of proof to prove whether it is safe or not.

       Nevertheless, distribution of the burden of proof is not the focus of
this paper. This paper instead focuses on the dilemma found in such
discussion over burden of proof that clearly shows the tension between
risk regulation and the rule of law. Some supporters of the precautionary
principle simply claim the necessity to reduce regulators’ burden of
proof and then quickly move on to technical questions, such as the
suitable range for the regulators’ burden of proof, the proper standards of
proof, to what extent shall the review courts defer to the factual
judgments made by the regulators, and so on. However, the tension
between risk regulation and rule of law does not disappear in this


33 ELIZABETH FISHER, RISK REGULATION AND ADMINISTRATIVE CONSTITUTIONALISM 44-
     46 (2007).
Introducing the Precautionary Principle into Administrative Law            69


process, since the unpredictability of the future remains regardless of the
answers given to these technical questions. Overall, the precautionary
principle allows regulators to take actions based on their own prediction
of the uncertain future, which itself is risky and contradictory to the
traditional notion found in administrative law that administrative action
shall be based on solid evidence.

(3) The Unavoidable But                       Not   Necessarily   Accusable
    Regulatory “Errors”
     Moreover, since the future is unpredictable and full of uncertainty,
there is always a possibility that precautious actions taken by regulators
may be later proved “erroneous” with the wisdom of hindsight. The
                                                                   34
“errors” may be “over-regulation” or “under-regulation.”                Over-
regulation occurs when decision-makers anticipate greater harm than
what actually occurs. Under-regulation occurs when decision-makers
anticipate less harm than what actually occurs. These errors of over- and
under-regulation are not literally beyond the realm of the authority that
statutes have bestowed on the regulators, but they are, in substance,
unreasonable or inappropriate. As such, these errors can still be deemed
illegal if the regulator is unable to justify them on the basis of
reasonableness or proportionality.

     However, only in hindsight can we really see that the precautious
measures taken were not proportionate to the potential harms. In the
given circumstance, these two kinds of “errors” might not be
condemnable as long as they are not due to bad faith or negligence.
Fundamentally, these “errors” could stem from “ignorance” associated


34 See Richard B. Stewart, Environmental Regulatory Decision-making under
   Uncertainty, 20 RES. L. ECON. 71 (2002).
70                                        《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


                                                                     35
with risks. Ignorance may fall into two categories:                       information
asymmetry and unknowns. Information asymmetry occurs when not all
stakeholders share the same knowledge or information as the others.
Theoretically, perfect communication between all players involved,
allowing them to learn from each other, could cure this kind of ignorance,
but in the real world the costs are often too high to do so. Unknowns are
what are now unknowable. Perhaps in the long run, nothing would be
unknowable, but there are always numerous unknowns to human society
at any particular time. Our future is uncertain because our future is
unknowable in the sense that there are limits of human knowledge at a
particular time. This kind of ignorance cannot be cured through
communicating with or learning from others simply because there are no
“others” who own the relevant knowledge or information.

      Some scholars have proposed the use of cost-benefit analysis
                                                   36
instead of the precautionary principle.                 However, the only real
mechanism cost-benefit analysis has for confronting the unknowns,
when neither the cost nor benefits can be known, is acknowledging that
they exist. Along these lines, action (including inaction) literally based



35 Actually, there is no bright line between the unknown and the known. What is
   between the unknown and the known is not a sharply gap but a gradually changing
   continuum. Knight has drawn a line between risk and uncertainty, which is
   accordance with the distinction “some risks are insurable and others are not”. FRANK
   H. KNIGHT, RISK, UNCERTAINTY AND PROFIT 44-48 (1964). Shen Kui has
   differentiated three kinds of ignorance: unknown by individuals, wrongfully knowing,
   unknown by human-being as a whole. See Shen Kui, Anti-Discrimination: The
   Faithful Choice between Knowing and Ignorance, 5 TSINGHUA CHINA L. REV. 20, 20-
   32 (2008)（沈岿，反歧视：有知和无知之间的信念选择—从乙肝病毒携带者
   受教育歧视切入，清华法学，5期，页20-32（2008年）                             ）.
36 For a criticism of this proposal, see Frank Ackerman & Lisa Heinzerling, Pricing the
   Priceless: Cost-benefit Analysis of Environmental Protection, 105 U. PA. L. REV. 1553
   (2002).
Introducing the Precautionary Principle into Administrative Law          71


on “scientific rationality” may be impossible when the available
information is too limited to support scientific rational decision-making.



3. The Potential of Traditional Mechanisms for
   Meeting the Challenges

     The undeniable and unavoidable reality is that our society has
already become a risk society, and risk regulation has become one of
governments’ most important functions. At the same time, the rule of law
has and still holds precious value to our society. It would be unthinkable
to abandon all the ideas of the rule of law just for the convenience of risk
regulation. Thus the key problem to resolve is how to reconcile the
practical needs of precaution against risks with the normative
requirements of the rule of law. However, as shown above, challenges to
the rule of law are rising due to the uncertainties facing risk regulation,
including the delegation without specific standards (2.A), indecisive
burden of proof (2.B) and regulatory errors beyond accusation (2.C). The
common concern over the tensions between the precautionary principle
and the rule of law is: the power authorized to agencies to take
precautionary actions might be abused.

     In the following part, I analyze the applicability of traditional
mechanisms of administrative law in the area of risk regulation,
discussing what they can do and what they cannot do with the challenges
rising from the tensions between precautionary principle and the rule of
law; in other words, I explore their potentials to control agencies’ power
in the area of risk precaution. Those mechanisms may be grossly divided
into two groups: rules and standards established in advance, and
72                                   《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


subsequent examination and supervision. It is found in the following part
that, as with facing the challenges, they can play an important but
limited role to prevent the abuse of risk regulator’s power.

(1) Rules and Standards

     A simple, direct technique to prevent administrative abuse of power
is the ex ante establishment of rules and standards.

     In administrative law, it is important to set rules and standards in
advance, and this can be taken as guarantees to the individual’s liberty.
As a modern advocate of the classical liberal theory, Fredrick Hayek
announced in his book, THE ROAD TO SERFDOM, that the rule of law
means that “government in all its actions is bound by rules fixed and
announced beforehand — rules that make it possible to foresee with fair
certainty how the authority will use its coercive powers in given
circumstances and to plan one’s individual affairs on the basis of this
knowledge.”37

     However, precaution in risk regulation has to deal with possible
outcomes that cannot be confirmed in advance. In this sense, it’s
impossible to directly specify what regulators facing a particular risk
should do using pre-established rules or standards. Nevertheless, it
would be too soon to conclude that precaution in risk regulation is
beyond the realm of given rules and standards. Given rules and standards
could still be helpful to some extent.

     First, the number of given rules and standards still applicable to
traditional agency action and traditional governmental function does not



37 FRIEDRICH A. HAYEK, THE ROAD TO SERFDOM 72 (1944).
Introducing the Precautionary Principle into Administrative Law                73


decline as the practice of precaution in risk regulation rises. Even in the
area of risk regulation, traditional administrative activities could still
exist. For example, various measures taken as response to emergencies
caused by risks (such as fire burning down a forest) are mostly nothing
“new” but typical measures of “command-and-control”; and it is
possible to set standards and rules for these types of activities in advance.
Only when precautionary issues are involved under scientific uncertainty
(such as harm has never occurred before due to similar risks), would the
agencies turn to the precautionary principle and “new” approach might
be needed.

     Second, the procedural rules and standards of administration might
be applicable where no substantial rules and standards are available. It
can be argued that transparency is “the natural enemy of arbitrariness
                                           38
and a natural ally against injustice.”          This point is still tenable in the
area of risk precaution. Requiring the agency to provide reasons for its
decision would also work in the areas of precaution, which push the
agency to be more careful and increase the public’s trust in the reasoning
of administrative decisions, hence helping with controlling the
administrative power and preventing abuse.

     Third, principles might be applicable when there are no specific
rules available. Legal systems include not only legal rules but also legal
              39
principles.        The general principles such as the principle of
proportionality, doctrine of legitimate expectation, natural justice, and so
on, should also be binding in the area of risk regulation. What’s more, in
comparison to specific and substantial rules, general principles leave


38 KENNETH C. DAVIS, DISCRETIONARY JUSTICE: A PRELIMINARY INQUIRY 98 (1969).
39 RONALD DWORKIN, LAW’S EMPIRE 211 (1986).
74                                           《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


more space for the agency’s discretion; hence risk regulation could be
                                                                                           40
more efficient and effective in the light of the “contextual rationality.”
The limitation is: all legal norms including rules and principles are
                                                                                      41
“semi-finished products” before they are applied to specific cases,                        so
compared to clear and definite rules in general, the application of
abstract and sometimes equivocal principles depends heavily on the
existence of developed and sophistic legal interpretation technologies
and tools.

(2) Examination and Supervision
       The ex post examination and supervision mechanisms include
investigation by various authorities, review and rectification of agency
activities, such as administrative reconsideration in China, an internal
monitoring of the administrative system, and inquiries and investigations
by congress, which compose an outside monitoring of the administrative
system. The most typical after-action checking mechanism is the judicial
review of administrative actions, which has long served as the core of
administrative law.

       The     ex    post     examination        and     supervision       help     control
administrative power while depending on the supervisors’ institutional
roles and competence. The authorities and functions of different


40 David A. Dana, The Contextual Rationality of the Precautionary Principle, 35
     QUEEN’S L.J. 67, 67-96 (2009).
41 As Cai Shuheng has pointed out, “The completed law requires putting general norms
     into particular cases with the consistency between the abstract and the specific.
     Therefore, a law that is completed as to legislation is not yet completed as to judicial
     practice.” CAI SHUHENG, THE SELF-CONSCIOUS DEVELOPMENT OF CHINA’S
     JURISPRUDENCE 164-65 (2005)（     「完全的法律，必須包容普通於特殊之中，要求
     抽象與具體之互相同一。……故在立法觀點已經完成之法律，在司法觀點均屬
     未完全。」蔡枢衡，中国法理自觉的发展，页164-165（2005年）                                     ）.
Introducing the Precautionary Principle into Administrative Law                       75


governmental departments determine the limitations of these checking
mechanisms. The obvious shortcoming of inside supervision is that the
supervisor is not an independent party and the public tends to doubt its
neutrality and fairness. In China, rarely does the congress hold an
inquiry into administrative actions, and investigation by the People’s
                                                                                       42
Congress aimed at an individual case could be highly controversial.
The scope of China’s judicial review is limited to specific administrative
                                                      43
decisions while rule-makings are excluded,                 and the reviewing judges
tend to focus on formalistic legality of administrative acts and only refer
                                                                   44
to the substantive legitimacy in very exceptional cases.

      In general, it’s very difficult in ex post examination to hold the risk
regulators responsible for the unintended consequences of their decisions,
because decisions in risk regulation are usually decisions made under
uncertainty. In the absence of sufficient scientific evidence and
inconsistencies in the available evidence, it seems harsh to hold risk
regulators responsible for the unavoidable but non-culpable “errors”
mentioned previously. Furthermore, in many cases the harmful results of
those “errors” are so serious that no regulatory agency would be able to
bear the full responsibility.



42 For discussion on “individual case investigation” of People’s Congress, see Bian
   Jianlin & Jiang Tao, The Study of Individual Case Investigation, 3 TRIB. POL. SCI. & L.
   95, 95-104 (2002)（卞建林、姜涛，个案监督研究，政法论坛，3期，页95-104
  （2002年）    ）.
43 XINGZHENG SUSONG FA (Administrative Litigation Act) art. 12 & 13 (2015) (China).
44 XINGZHENG SUSONG FA (Administrative Litigation Act) art. 5 (1989) (China). This
   provisions have been revised to expend the application of standards as to substantial
   legitimacy, such as the article 70 of the Administrative Litigation Law of PRC
   provides that when administrative activity involves abuse of power or is obviously
   unfair, the people’s court may render judgment to annul or partially annul the
   administrative act.
76                                  《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


     Additionally, ex post examination and supervision depend on
established substantive and procedural norms. In the absence of such
norms, there will be no basis for judging whether administrative
activities were legal. Similarly, the limitation of rules and standards
established in advance (as discussed earlier) would also influence the
function of ex post monitoring mechanisms. Therefore, the seemingly
more promising method is to apply newly developed procedural norms
as standards in ex post monitoring, which includes requiring the agencies
to rationalize their own decisions. In traditional administrative practice,
the requirement to provide reasons has made the agencies more prudent
in their decision making while increasing public acceptance and
compliance as well. As for risk regulation, the reason-giving requirement
can also have such an effect. In fact, since the practices of risk regulation
unavoidably involve scientific uncertainties, it would be even more
important for regulatory agencies to give good reasons for their
decisions. Failure to do so would draw criticism of arbitrariness and
result in loss of public trust.



4. Emerging Mechanisms to Reconcile Precaution
   with the Rule of Law

     The typical kind of traditional administrative action is law
enforcement. That is, to apply general norms to concrete facts and
specific cases, where the norms are already given and the facts can be
collected from a situation that has usually already happened or is
currently happening. In contrast, there are usually no such given norms
and facts in the area of precaution, which tries to regulate for something
that may (or may not) happen in the future.
Introducing the Precautionary Principle into Administrative Law          77


     Matters of uncertainty in risk regulation are normally beyond
legislators’ area of expertise, and neither the competence of supervising
authorities nor judicial review techniques can resolve this issue.
Therefore, traditional mechanisms of administrative law —rules and
standards set in advance and after examination and supervision— can
only play limited roles in reconciling risk regulation with the rule of law,
as found in the last part.

     Therefore, it’s important to develop new mechanisms of
administrative law to deal with uncertainties involved in risk regulation.
In this section, I argue that we could draw heavily from the experiences
of soft law and participatory model of public administration by
examining the following questions: (1) how might soft law help address
both risk regulation and the rule of law? (2) Is the general public (the
layman) able to make any difference in reconciling the rule of law with
risk regulation through their participation in public administration? (3)
How might these two mechanisms do better than traditional mechanisms
in dealing with uncertainty?

(1) Soft Law
     The term “soft law” refers to rules that set standards of conduct
while are neither strictly binding nor directly enforceable, such as
guidelines, policy declarations, codes of conduct, codes of practice etc.
Unlike hard law, soft law’s effectiveness doesn’t directly depend on the
force of state power. It is not enacted and carried out in a “top-down”
approach. It is often characterized by self-regulation and self-governance,
which usually make full use of people’s wisdom at the “grassroots” level.
78                                    《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


     While soft law is not a new phenomenon, it has drawn increasing
                   45
attention recently.     It has started to play an increasing role in areas of
risk regulation such as pollution control, labor policies and consumer
protection, etc. There are no generally accepted formulations of soft law
at this moment, while some overlapping consensus, including that soft
law is symmetrical to and as effective as hard law, is beginning to
     46                                               47
form.     Generally speaking, “soft law is also law.”

     Taking soft law into consideration broadens the concept of
traditional law, thereby widening the general understanding of the rule of
law. From this standpoint, we can find that the tension between risk
regulation and the rule of law is largely due to our traditional and narrow
interpretation of the law. Once we discontinue viewing the rule of law as
exclusively the rule of hard law and instead recognize that the rule of
soft law is also an important part of the rule of law, we see that soft law
can play an effective role in areas hard law could not. This means there
are still possibilities to keep regulatory powers within the confines of
law when the rule of “hard law” is not available. In this sense, the rule of
“soft law” could reduce the tension between risk regulation and the rule
of law.

     Moreover, in practices, soft law provides new tools for risk
regulators to achieve the regulatory objectives in an effective and legal
                                                            48
manner. The Open Method of Coordination (OMC)                    in which EU


45 See  ULRIKA MORTH, SOFT LAW IN GOVERNANCE AND REGULATION: AN
   INTERDISCIPLINARY ANALYSIS (2004).
46 Kenneth W. Abbott & Duncan Snidal, Hard and Soft Law in International
   Governance, 54(3) INT’L ORG. 421, 421-22 (2000).
47 See LUO HAOCAI & SONG GONGDE, SOFT LAW GOVERNANCE: TOWARDS AN
   INTEGRATED APPROACH (2013).
48 Wang Xinyan, On Open Method of Coordination, in SOFT LAW AND PUBLIC
Introducing the Precautionary Principle into Administrative Law                 79


member states learn from each other by sharing information and
initiatives is an inspiring example. This mechanism enables them to
adopt best practices and coordinate their national policies. The Voluntary
                   49
Agreement (VA)          is another inspiring example, in which the industry
voluntarily exerts additional effort beyond (e.g. cut down more
pollutants) what the legal standards require. VA’s effectiveness depends
on the incentives to participants, such as promotion of their public image
to reduce community concern and/or to receive financial support, etc.
Both OMC and VA have been widely used and proven helpful in
reaching various regulatory objectives in several areas. One common
characteristic of these new tools is that the effectiveness is not
safeguarded by “command and control” regulations but instead relies on
peer pressure, such as naming and shaming. Hence, on the one hand,
regulatory objectives can be achieved while reducing enforcement costs;
on the other hand, since no compulsory measures are taken by agencies,
there will no longer be a “legitimacy crisis” in regards to administrative
power delegated to agencies (as discussed earlier).

(2) Participatory Model of Administration
     “Public participation has been the worldwide tendency” ever since
1970s, especially after the worldwide public administration reform,
which has deeply changed the mode of traditional administration by
                             50
“command and control.”            In China, ideas on and practices of public


   GOVERNANCE 312, 312-23 (Luo Haocai ed., 2006)（王新艳，论开放协调机制，收
   于：罗豪才编，软法与公共治理，页312-323（2006年）                         ）.
49 See Richard B. Stewart, A New Generation of Environmental Regulation, 29 CAP. U.
   L. REV. 21 (2001).
50 Jiang Bixin & Jiang Chunyan, The Trend of Public Participation as Challenge to
   Administrative Law, 6 CHINA LEGAL SCI. 50, 50-57 (2005)（江必新、江春燕，公众
   参与趋势对行政法和行政法学的挑战，中国法学，6期，页50-57（2005年）                                     ）.
80                                        《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


                                                                      51
participation have also been continued to develop.                         There are
provisions on public participation appearing in the statutes on
administrative penalty and administrative licensing. Some practices of
public participation in administration, such as public hearing in
administrative decision-making, participatory model of government
achievements appraisal, etc., have drawn large amounts of attention
through mass media.

      The essence of participatory administration is widely accepted as
non-government participants do play roles in the administrative process.
Compared to traditional administrative processes controlled completely
by the agencies, the participatory model of public administration has
many advantages. These advantages include the promotion of
transparency in administrative processes, an increase in the acceptance
of the administrative decision, and enhancement of the accountability of
non-elected officials. Also, since the act of participation itself inspires
participatory will and action, the participatory model of public
administration is inherently self-strengthening.
                                           52
      Aside from these advantages,              there are even more benefits to
dealing with the tension between risk regulation and the rule of law. On
one end, involvement in public administration under the participatory
model is open to experts, the general public and interested parties,
especially the potentially affected parties. This allows for the possibility



51 See Jin Zining, Participatory Model of Administration: American Theory and Chinese
   Practice, in 20 REVIEW OF NEW POLITICAL ECONOMY 119, 119-29 (Wang Dingding
   ed., 2012)（金自宁，参与式行政：美国理论与中国实践，收于：汪丁丁编，新
   政治经济学评论20，页119-129（2012年）                     ）.
52 Public participation in the risk regulation “is both necessary and desirable”. Thomas
   O. McGarity, Public Participation in Risk Regulation, 1 RISK 103, 103 (1990).
Introducing the Precautionary Principle into Administrative Law                   81


                                                                            53
of breaking the knowledge-information monopoly regulators hold                   and
a cutting down of the uncertainty stemming from information
asymmetry that has long plagued risk regulators. Therefore, the
participatory model could help agencies achieve better results in risk
regulation. On the other end, participation changes the process of
administration by incorporating private actors into public administration,
offering private actors the opportunities to express diverse interests and
wishes by carefully arranging procedural rights and obligations. For
example, the public’s right to know and the agency’s disclosure
obligations are affected. The right of interested parties to participate and
the agency’s duty to provide explanations could have the so-called effect
of “restricting power with the right.” This kind of restriction inherent to
the administrative process could substantially alleviate concern over risk
regulatory power being abused, remarkably serving to mitigate the
tension between risk regulation and the rule of law.

(3) Further Discussion: To Democratize Risk Regulation?
     What both the participatory model of administration and soft law
have in common is the incorporation of non-governmental actors into the
administrative process traditionally dominated by agencies. This change
coincides with the worldwide shift from regulation to governance of
                  54
public affairs,        and this shift is also in line with the emphasis on
democracy by some of the most influential scholars in the current risk



53 “To break the ‘knowledge-power’ monopoly (in administration), the key is to
   empower the public as participator.” WANG XIXIN, PUBLIC PARTICIPATION AND
   ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS 254-55 (2007)（王锡锌，公众参与和行政过程，页
   254-255（2007年）     ）.
54 See generally, Orly Lobel, The Renew Deal: The Fall of Regulation and the Rise of
   Governance in Contemporary Legal Thought, 89 MINN. L. REV. 7 (2004).
82                                       《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


                                    55                            56
society, including Ulrich Beck and Anthony Giddens.                    According to
Beck and Giddens, it would be sensible to seek to democratize risk
regulation, which the participatory model of administration and soft law
governance suggest, and this is part of the big picture of risk society
under democratic governance.

      Two important traits of risks in modern society legitimatize this
transformation. First, the risk in modern society is both a physical reality
and a socially constructed conception. Risk could cause material
damages in the real world the moment the risk materializes. This is why
we say risk is a physical reality. However, before that moment, the risk’s
existence is based on the community’s subjective perception and
judgment. This is why we argue risk is also a socially constructed
conception. In the latter sense, extensive and active risk communication
                                                   57
shall be a prerequisite for risk regulation.            Without this prerequisite,
risk regulation tends to be doubted and challenged by the public.

      Second, the most difficult and significant problems in risk
regulation often are not problems that can be decided through scientific
rationality. These problems tend to always involve the distribution of the
risks and resources needed for dealing with risks. For example, risks are
ubiquitous in modern society, but the resources to deal with them are
limited. Zero-risk is impossible to achieve. Furthermore, the other side
of risk is often opportunity, and people often choose to take risks for
potential benefits because many of them regard zero-risk as undesirable.


55 See BECK, RISK SOCIETY, supra note 5.
56 ANTHONY GIDDENS, THE CONSEQUENCES OF MODERNITY (1990).
57 Jin Zining, The Risk Communication and Its Structure, 5 J. BEIJING SCHOOL ADMIN. C.
     83, 83-89 (2012)（金自宁，风险规制中的信息交流及其制度建构，北京行政学
     院学报，5期，页83-89（2012年）   ）.
Introducing the Precautionary Principle into Administrative Law            83


In this case, the problem is, “What’s the acceptable level of risk?”
Ultimately, this brings us back to the age-old political and ethical
          58
question of “What’s the life we want to live?” Apparently, in a
democratic community or a community currently in the process of
transforming into a democratic one, extensive discussions and
deliberations between citizens and regulators are necessary to reach an
acceptable answer for this kind of question.

     Of course, the transformation from risk regulation to democratic
risk governance is not free of challenges. One of the most perplexing
challenges is the question of whether “the general public, as layman, are
able to make any difference through their participation in risk regulation?
Isn’t there a possibility that the layman’s emotional reactions would turn
                                                                     59
‘the reason free from passion (Aristotle)’into the ‘law of fear’?”

     In fact, in this specialized modern society, the general public lives
in a world of unknowns, because they have to depend on the expertise of
others. The general public usually doesn’t know anything about the
special cognitive means used by experts, such as “measuring
procedures,” “statistical survey,” “reflections on validity” and
                                                   60
“consideration of tolerance thresholds.”                In areas beyond their
specialized discipline, the experts are just like the general public—it is
possible that the experts also know little about the world beyond their
own special field of study. Even in their specific field of study, the
experts might also live in a world of unknowns when taking into
consideration the large amount of things beyond the limits of existing



58 BECK, RISK SOCIETY, supra note 5, at 28-29.
59 See CASS R. SUNSTEIN, LAW OF FEAR (2005).
60 BECK, RISK SOCIETY, supra note 5, at 54.
84                                         《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


knowledge. Such unknowns undeniably exist, although people may look
at and deal with them in very different ways.

       One way to view and deal with these unknowns is to focus on the
necessity of involving the general public in deciding how to assess and
manage risk. Public participation would help remedy the first category
of ignorance discussed earlier (in section 2), namely, information
asymmetry amongst experts and also between the experts and the
general public. Public participation would allow risk regulators to make
full use of the scattered knowledge owned by these myriad different
actors. In regard to the second category of ignorance, the unknowns, the
general public’s participation becomes even more necessary. Because in
this case, there are no longer any experts, no one could claim that he or
she “knows” how to deal with the particular risk. In other words, no one
could claim his or her decision is “right” according to scientific
rationality. Consequently, the focus no longer falls on how to make the
“right” risk decision according to the scientific rationality, as this is
impossible, but instead shift the emphasis to how to make the “fair” risk
decision according to social justice. Ignorance is not necessarily a barrier
                         61
to “fair” decisions,          or at least, ignorance is not a due reason to exclude
interested parties from the process of decision making.

       From the view of fairness, all the affected parties should have the
right to participate in risk decision making. This means, it’s necessary to
establish a general legal system that incorporates risk communication to
provide the non-governmental actors opportunities to participate in risk
regulation with decisions involving uncertainty, especially in the case of


61 In the light of John Rawls’ “Veil of Ignorance”, we could even say, ignorance might
     be the guarantee of fairness.
Introducing the Precautionary Principle into Administrative Law                  85


the second category pertaining to ignorance as noted above. When we
are all living in a world of unknowns, we should collectively decide
through deliberation and negotiation what kind of risk and what level of
risk should be taken. By doing so, if the results of our decisions turn out
to be good, we can thank ourselves; if the results of our decisions turn
out to be bad, we’ll have nobody to blame but ourselves. In other words,
we the people, not the risk regulatory agencies would be responsible for
our own future.



5. Structuring the Precautionary Principle under the
   Rule of Law

     The fact that the precautionary principle is becoming increasingly
accepted in positive law promotes communal efforts to keep
precautionary actions against risks under the control of the existing legal
system, which includes structuring the precautionary principle, although
                                                                        62
empirical studies have shown that the patterns of precaution                 and the
                            63
risk regulation regimes          fluctuate significantly in different cases. In
light of the above analysis and discussion regarding reconciling
precaution in risk regulation and the rule of law, we can see there are
important elements missing from existing proposals on how to structure
the precautionary principle.

     Take     the    influential     Communication        from    the    European


62 See Jonathan B. Wiener & Michael D. Rogers, Comparing Precaution in the United
   States and Europe, 5(4) J. RISK RES. 317 (2002).
63 See Christopher Hood, Henry Rothstein, Robert Baldwin, Judith Rees & Michael
   Spackman, Where Risk Society Meets the Regulatory State: Exploring Variations in
   Risk Regulation Regimes, 1(1) RISK MGMT. 21, 21-34 (1999).
86                                      《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


Commission on the Precautionary Principle (2000) (the Communication
        64
2000)        as an example. It is not a compulsory regulation or directive but
a non-binding general guidance on how to interpret and apply the
precautionary principle. According to the CFC, the use of the
precautionary principle can be divided into two steps. The first step is to
decide whether to rely on the precautionary principle. This decision shall
be made on the identification of potential adverse impacts and scientific
assessment of the risk. When “potentially dangerous effects” have been
identified and scientific evaluation “does not allow the risk to be
determined with sufficient certainty,” it would be proper to turn to the
precautionary principle. The second step is to decide the measures to be
taken in consideration of the precautionary principle. Starting from the
scientific assessment being “as objective and comprehensive as
possible,” decision makers need to take into account all related factors
such as the degree of uncertainty, “acceptable” level of risk, the potential
benefits and costs of action or lack of action, and so on. In this process,
“reliance on the precautionary principle is no excuse for derogating from
the general principles of risk management,” including the principle of
proportionality, non-discrimination, consistency, examining costs and
benefits being subject to review in light of new scientific data. With the
above context, the Communication 2000 has established a framework
for structuring the precautionary principle.

       The Communication 2000, on one hand, as a model of the efforts to
structure the precautionary principle, explicitly states that the
Community “has the right to establish the level of protection” that “it


64 Communication    From The Commission On the Precautionary Principle,
     COM/2000/0001, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=142630851673
     8&uri=CELEX:52000DC0001 (last visited Mar. 3, 2016).
Introducing the Precautionary Principle into Administrative Law                 87


deems appropriate,” including taking precautionary measures when
scientific uncertainty exists; on the other hand, it conditions
precautionary actions to be based on scientific assessment, the principle
of proportionality and cost-benefit analysis, etc. In this sense, the
Communication 2000 also tries to balance the practical needs for risk
regulation and the normative requirements of the rule of law.

     However, from the perspective of relieving the tension between risk
regulation and rule of law, the implications of the following three
sentences that appeared separately in the Communication have been
overlooked to an extent; hence their value has been underestimated.

     “Judging what is an ‘acceptable’ level of risk for society is an
                                        65
eminently political responsibility.”

     “The decision-making procedure should be transparent and should
involve as early as possible and to the extent reasonably possible all
                     66
interested parties.”

     “The precautionary principle should be considered within a
structured approach to the analysis of risk which comprises three
                                                                           67
elements: risk assessment, risk management, risk communication.”

     The connection between these three sentences emerges when we


65 Communication  From The Commission On the Precautionary Principle,
   COM/2000/0001, 5 of Summary, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid
   =1426308516738&uri=CELEX:52000DC0001 (last visited Mar. 3, 2016).
66 Communication From The Commission On the Precautionary Principle,
   COM/2000/0001, 5 of Summary, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid
   =1426308516738&uri=CELEX:52000DC0001 (last visited Mar. 3, 2016).
67 Communication From The Commission On the Precautionary Principle,
   COM/2000/0001, 4 of Summary, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid
   =1426308516738&uri=CELEX:52000DC0001 (last visited Mar. 3, 2016).
88                                     《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


place them together and interpret them as a whole. Namely, it’s the
communication of risk, which deserves further attention as discussed
above. In turn, they explain respectively the necessity and feasibility of
risk communication and its significant status in the structure of
precautionary principle. The logic implied by those sentences could be
that although the “acceptable” level of risk for society is supposed to be
based on scientific data, it is not just a matter of science but also a
“political” one, with the trickiest part being not scientific derivation but
political judgment. In terms of the political judgment, it is the interested
parties who are affected by the risk that should have a voice in defining
the acceptable level of risk. Therefore, besides risk assessment and risk
management, risk communication that engages all the interested parties
should be a valuable and irreplaceable element in the structure of the
precautionary principle.

       We have already seen in the former part of this article that
introducing multiple parties into the administrative processes, which
were traditionally monopolized by agencies, and providing them the
opportunity to exchange information, compete for diverse interest and
                                                                          68
arrive at compromise or “incompletely theorized agreement”                     are
features shared by both the participatory model of public administration
and soft law. And these three undervalued sentences in the
Communication have demonstrated a new way to incorporate this
“democratizing      risk   regulation”     element     into    structuring     the
precautionary principle, namely, establishing a risk communication
system than can be applied generally.



68 See Cass R. Sunstein, Incompletely Theorized Agreements, 108 HARV. L. REV. 1733
     (1995).
Introducing the Precautionary Principle into Administrative Law                         89


      As shown earlier, administrative action may be legitimatized by
following legislative directives or relying on expertise. But when we
delve deeper into how or why legislative directive or expertise is able to
justify administrative action, it turns out that, legitimacy of legislation
stems from its democratic law-making process, and legitimacy of
expertise comes from its duty to serve public interest. Through risk
communication involving multiple parties, risk regulation could become
an outcome of democratic decision-making process, allowing to better
serve public interest. What needs to be clarified is that this kind of
“democracy”        is    not    the    democracy        conventionally        taken     as
parliamentary democracy but a special form of direct democracy or
                               69
participatory democracy.            In addition, this kind of “public interest” is
not the public interest conventionally taken as the objective common
interest of the society independent from individual interest, but rather a
                                                                             70
compromise between the different interests of multiple parties.



6. Conclusion

      No legal system can exist as a closed, isolated system.
Administrative law is also responsive to social changes. The
incorporation of precautionary principle into positive law is a sign
showing that administrative law has adjusted to the reality of risk society.


69 See Jiang Ming’an, Public Participation and Rule of Law, 2 CHINA LEGAL SCI. 26,
   26-37 (2004)（姜明安，公众参与与行政法治，中国法学，2期，页26-37（2004
   年）  ）.
70 In Stewart’s words: “there is no ascertainable, transcendent ‘public interest,’ but only
   the distinct interests of various individuals and groups in society”; “Under this
   assumption, legislation represents no more than compromises struck between
   competing interest groups”. Stewart, supra note 19, at 1667.
90                                          《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


       The most important characteristic of risk society is probably
                                                   71
“introducing the future into the present.”              Because humans are not able
to foresee the future fully and clearly, one result of introducing the future
to the present is that there would no longer exist absolute safety. Hence
the need for safety is expected to increase, and the power of risk
regulators tends to expand beyond the traditional realm of administrative
law. Therefore, it’s necessary to develop new legal mechanisms to
reconcile risk regulation with the rule of law. Namely, we can learn from
the developing experience of “soft law” and “participatory model of
public administration” and place more emphasis on risk communication.

       In fact, the path for a shift from regulation to governance is cleared
when not only rules but also principles have been allowed to govern, and
the recognition of soft law governance, participatory model of public
administration, and risk communication will speed this shift. Of course,
both the participatory model of administration and soft law governance
are still in the process of development. Some researchers have already
                                      72
identified their limitations.              Nevertheless, their significance on
administrative law should not be overlooked, and it makes sense to find
ways to use them appropriately.


71 See NIKLAS LUHMANN, RISK: A SOCIOLOGICAL THEORY (Rhodes Barrett trans., Aldine
     de Gruyter 1993) (1991). Especially the second chapter: Risk as the Future.
72 In public governance, soft law plays a supplementary role comparing to hard law. See
     Luo Haocai & Song Gongde, Taking Soft Law Seriously, in SOFT LAW AND PUBLIC
     GOVERNANCE 1 (Luo Haocai ed., 2006)（罗豪才、宋功德，认真对待软法，收
     于：罗豪才编，软法与公共治理，页1（2006年））. Adoption of participatory
     model of public administration does not mean to deny the rationality of the traditional
     agency-dominating model, because “in theory and practice, government is more
     capable of obtaining comprehensive information about both specific cases and general
     problem; in the meantime, government tend to have a systematic understanding on the
     matters within its domain while the public and experts do not.” See WANG, supra note
     53, at 252.
Introducing the Precautionary Principle into Administrative Law                91




                                  Reference

Abbott, Kenneth W., and Duncan Snidal. 2000. Hard and Soft Law in
     International Governance. International Organization 54(3):421-
     456.
Ackerman, Frank, and Lisa Heinzerling. 2002. Pricing the Priceless:
     Cost-benefit Analysis of Environmental Protection. University of
     Pennsylvania Law Review 150:1553-1584.
Beck, Ulrich. 1992. From Industrial Society to the Risk Society:
     Questions      of    Survival,     Social    Structure       and   Ecological
     Enlightenment. Theory, Culture & Society 9(1):97-123.
─. 1992. Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity. Thousand Oaks,
     CA: Sage Publications.
─. 1999. World Risk Society. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Bian, Jianlin, and Jiang Tao. 2002. The Study of Individual Case
     Investigation. Tribune of Political Science and Law 3:95-104.（卞
     建林、姜涛（2002），个案监督研究，政法论坛，3期，页95-
     104。）
Cai, Shuheng. 2005. The Self-Conscious Development of China’s
     Jurisprudence. Beijing: Tsinghua University Press. （ 蔡 枢 衡
    （2005）
         ，中国法理自觉的发展，北京：清华大学出版社。）
Center for the Study of Law Science and Technology, Arizona State
     University College of Law. 2003. From General Policy to Legal
     Rule. Environmental Health Perspectives 111(14):1799-1803.
Cross, Frank B. 1996. Paradoxical Perils of the Precautionary Principle.
     Washington and Lee Law Review 53:851-925.
Dana, David A. 2003. A Behavioral Economic Defense of the
     Precautionary Principle. Northwestern University Law Review
92                                  《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）



     97:1315-1345.
─. 2009. The Contextual Rationality of the Precautionary Principle.
     Queen’s Law Journal 35:67-96.
Davis, Kenneth C. 1969. Discretionary Justice: A Preliminary Inquiry.
     Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press.
Dworkin, Ronald. 1986. Law’s Empire. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Fisher,   Elizabeth.   2007.   Risk     Regulation   and   Administrative
     Constitutionalism. Oxford: Hart.
Fuierer, Alana M. 1995. The Anti-Chlorine Campaign in the Great Lakes:
     Should Chlorinated Compounds Be Guilty Until Proven Innocent?.
     Buffalo Law Review 43:181-228.
Giddens, Anthony. 1990. The Consequences of Modernity. Stanford, CA:
     Stanford University Press.
─. 2003. Runaway World: How Globalization Is Reshaping Our
     Lives. 2d ed. New York, NY: Routledge.
Hayek, Friedrich. A. 1944. The Road to Serfdom. Chicago, IL: The
     University of Chicago Press.
Hood, Christopher, Henry Rothstein, Robert Baldwin, Judith Rees, and
     Michael Spackman. 1999. Where Risk Society Meets the
     Regulatory State: Exploring Variations in Risk Regulation Regimes.
     Risk Management: An International Journal 1(1):21-34.
Hoshino, Eiichi. 2004. Person in Private Law. Beijing: Chinese Legal
     Publishing House.（星野英一著，王闯译（2004），私法中的
     人，北京：中国法制出版社。）
Jiang, Bixin, and Jiang Chunyan. 2005. The Trend of Public
     Participation as Challenge to Administrative Law. China Legal
     Science 6:50-57.（江必新、江春燕（2005）
                                  ，公众参与趋势对行
     政法和行政法学的挑战，中国法学，6期，页50-57。）
Jiang, Ming’an. 2004. Public Participation and Rule of Law. China
Introducing the Precautionary Principle into Administrative Law       93


     Legal Science 2:26-37.（姜明安（2004），公众参与与行政法
     治，中国法学，2期，页26-37。）
Jin, Zining. 2007. Reflection on the Privatization of Public Law: Against
     the Background of the Worldwide Public Administration Reform.
     Zhejiang Academic Journal 5:143-150.（金自宁（2007）
                                                  ，“公法
     私法化＂诸观念反思—以公共行政改革运动为背景，浙江学
     刊，5期，页143-150。）
─. 2012. Participatory Model of Administration: American Theory
     and Chinese Practice. Pp. 119-129 in vol. 20 of Review of New
     Political Economy, edited by Wang Dingding. Hangzhou: Zhejiang
     University Press.（金自宁（2012），参与式行政：美国理论与
     中国实践，收于：汪丁丁编，新政治经济学评论20，页119-
     129，杭州：浙江大学出版社。）
─. 2012. The Risk Communication and Its Structure. Journal of
     Beijing Administrative College 5:83-89.（金自宁（2012）
                                                     ，风险
     规制中的信息交流及其制度建构，北京行政学院学报，5期，
     页83-89。）
Knight, Frank H. 1964. Risk, Uncertainty and Profit. New York, NY:
     Augustus M. Kelley.
Lobel, Orly. 2004. The Renew Deal: The Fall of Regulation and the Rise
     of Governance in Contemporary Legal Thought. Minnesota Law
     Review 89:7-27.
Luhmann, Niklas. 1993 (1991). Risk: A Sociological Theory, translated
     by Rhodes Barrett. New York, NY: de Gruyter.
Luo, Haocai, and Song Gongde. 2006. Taking Soft Law Seriously. Pp.
     48-84 in Soft Law and Public Governance, edited by Luo Haocai.
     Beijing: Peking University Press.（罗豪才、宋功德（2006）
                                                   ，认
     真对待软法，收于：罗豪才編，软法与公共治理，页48-84，
     北京：北京大学出版社。）
94                                 《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）



Luo, Haocai, and Song Gongde. 2013. Soft Law Governance: Towards
     an Integrated Approach. Buffalo, NY: William S. Hein & Co.
Lupton, Deborah. 1999. Risk. New York, NY: Routledge.
Mandel, Gregory N., and James Thuo Gathii. 2006. Cost Benefit
     Analysis Versus the Precautionary Principle: Beyond Cass
     Sunstein’s Laws of Fear. University of Illinois Law Review 5:1037-
     1081.
McGarity, Thomas O. 1990. Public Participation in Risk Regulation.
     Risk 1:103-115.
McIntyre, Owen, and Thomas Mosedale. 1997. The Precautionary
     Principle as a Norm of Customary International Law. Journal of
     Environmental Law 9:221-241.
Morth, Ulrika. 2004. Soft Law in Governance and Regulation: An
     Interdisciplinary Analysis. Northampton, MA: E. Elgar.
Sachs, Noah M. 2011. Rescuing the Strong Precautionary Principle from
     Its Critics. University of Illinois Law Review 4:1285-1338.
Sandin, Per. 1999. Dimensions of the Precautionary Principle. Human
     and Ecological Risk Assessment: An International Journal
     5(5):889-907.
Sands, Philippe. 2003. Principles of International Environmental Law.
     2d ed. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Shen, Kui. 2008. Anti-Discrimination: The Faithful Choice between
     Knowing and Ignorance. Tsinghua China Law Review 5:20-32.（沈
     岿（2008），反歧视：有知和无知之间的信念选择—从乙肝
     病毒携带者受教育歧视切入，清华法学，5期，页20-32。）
Som, Claudia, L. M. Hilty, and A. R. Köhler. 2009. The Precautionary
     Principle as a Framework for a Sustainable Information Society.
     Journal of Business Ethics 85(3):493-505.
Stewart, Richard B. 1975. The Reformation of American Administrative
Introducing the Precautionary Principle into Administrative Law     95


     Law. Harvard Law Review 88:1667-1813.
─. 2001. A New Generation of Environmental Regulation. Capital
     University Law Review 29:21-182.
─ . 2002. Environmental Regulatory Decision-making under
     Uncertainty. Research in Law and Economics 20:71-126.
Stone, Christopher D. 2001. Is There a Precautionary Principle?.
     Environmental Law Reporter News and Analysis 31(7):10790-
     10799.
Sunstein, Cass R. 1995. Incompletely Theorized Agreements. Harvard
     Law Review 108:1733-1772.
─. 2002. Risk and Reason: Safety, Law and the Environment.
     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
─ . 2003. Beyond the Precautionary Principle. University of
     Pennsylvania Law Review 151:1003-1058.
─. 2005. Law of Fear. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Van den Belt, Henk. 2003. Debating the Precautionary Principle: “Guilty
     until Proven Innocent” or “Innocent until Proven Guilty”?. Plant
     Physiology 132(3):1122-1126.
Waldo, Dwight. 1948. The Administrative State. New York, NY: Ronald
     Press.
Wang, Xinyan. 2006. On Open Method of Coordination. Pp. 312-323 in
     Soft Law and Public Governance, edited by Luo Haocai. Beijing:
     Peking University Press.（王新艳（2006），论开放协调机制，
     收于：罗豪才编，软法与公共治理，页312-323，北京：北京
     大学出版社。）
Wang, Xixin. 2007. Public Participation and Administrative Process.
     Beijing: China Democracy & Legal System Press. （ 王 锡 锌
    （2007），公众参与和行政过程，北京：中国民主法制出版
     社。）
96                               《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）



Wiener, Jonathan B., and Michael D. Rogers. 2002. Comparing
     Precaution in the United States and Europe. Journal of Risk
     Research 5(4):317-349.
Wiener, Jonathan B., Michael D. Rogers, James K. Hamitt, and Peter H.
     Sand. 2011. The Reality of Precaution: Comparing Risk Regulation
     in the United States and Europe. New York, NY: RFF Press.
Introducing the Precautionary Principle into Administrative Law   97




                     風險預防與行政法治
                             — 挑戰及應對

                                    金自寧＊


                                    摘 要
  隨著風險成為現代社會的重要特徵，風險規制上升為現代政府
的一項重要任務。風險預防原則在實證法上的出現，標誌著立法者
將風險規制納入行政法規範體系之內的努力。但是，由於風險與無
知相伴，規制者不得不決策於不確定性之中，風險規制實踐對傳統
行政法治理念構成重大挑戰，甚至危及傳統行政法治理念的核心要
求。平衡風險規制與行政法治的傳統技術力有不逮，有必要發展
「軟法之治」、「參與型行政」和「風險交流」等新的制度技術，以
求得風險規制與行政法治之間的平衡。

關鍵詞：風險預防原則、風險規制、行政法治、參與型行政、軟法
    之治。




＊   北京大學國際法學院副教授。
