  Comparative Administrative Law in Asia
Academia Sinica Law Journal                                                    99
Issue 19, pp. 99-158 (Sep. 2016)


                                                                   ＊
              An Unprincipled Principle?:
 A Comparative Study on the Application of the Principle
     of Proportionality in Environmental Cases in
                 Taiwan and the EU

                                                 ＊＊
                                   Chun-Yuan Lin


                                      Abstract
     The principle of proportionality has been widely accepted across
the globe as an objective principle of administrative law, including in
new democracies such as Taiwan and supranational organizations such
as the EU. The question is, whether the allegedly objective and universal
legal doctrine adapts to different social context and nature of cases.
      Through the review of judgments on environmental cases of
Taiwanese Administrative Court and the European Court of Justice, this
article takes a closer look at how the principle of proportionality is
applied in different regimes and distinctive environmental cases.
     This article finds that the principle is applied differently according
to the social context and social needs. In Taiwan, a new democracy with
a short history of legal succession, the court usually applies the principle
superficially or incorrectly; in the EU, the court correctly understands
the principle but strategically interprets it to promote European
integration. In addition, the principle also adapts to the distinctiveness of

＊  Submission Date: June 2, 2015; Acceptance Date: January 13, 2016. [Line Editor:
   Yu-Wen Chang].
＊＊ Assistant Professor, Department of Financial & Economic Law, School of Law,
   Chung Yuan Christian University.
   Online: http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/03805161.pdf.
100                                 《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


environmental cases. The court in Taiwan shifts the standard of review
and includes multiple interests into the balance; the EU court places an
emphasis on the necessity test, compromising the principle with the
precautionary principle to develop the concept of procedural
proportionality.

KEYWORDS: the principle of proportionality, uncertainty, environmental
          issues, regional integration, democratization, precautionary
          principle.



                                Contents

 1. Introduction
 2. A Shared Principle of Administrative Law in Taiwan and the EU
    2.1 Taiwan: An Imported Constitutional Principle Becomes a
         Foundation of Administrative Law
    2.2 The EU: The Community’s General Principle Derives from Legal
         Tradition
    2.3 The Shared Understanding of the Proportionality Principle
 3. The Proportionality Principle for a New Democracy and for the European
    Integration
    3.1 Taiwan: A Young Principle in a New Democracy
    3.2 EU: A Deep-rooted Principle in the Context of Regional Integration
 4. Adapting to Environmental Cases in Taiwan and the EU
    4.1 The Proportionality Principle Confronting Environmental Cases
    4.2 Adapting to Environmental Cases in Taiwan
    4.3 Adapting to Environmental Cases in the EU
 5. An Unprincipled Principle?
 6. Conclusion
An Unprincipled Principle?                                                          101


1. Introduction

      Courts in many jurisdictions have examined the legality of
administrative measures on the basis of the principle of proportionality.
The principle has spread throughout continental Europe as well as the
                     1
United Kingdom. Today, it forms part of administrative law in many
new democracies such Taiwan, South Korea and regional organization
                                2
such as European Union. The principle is commonly viewed as an
objective legal tool to protect individual rights from arbitrary
government regulation. Scholars such as Kingsbury and Steward even
argue that the principle of proportionality has become a general principle
                                    3
of global administrative law.

      The question is whether a legal principle can be reasonably applied
universally not only across borders but also in various kinds of cases.
This question can be separated into two different contexts. First, since
every jurisdiction has its own unique legal system, culture and social
context, it is not necessarily true that they understand and apply legal
doctrines the same way. Second, some legal issues have distinctive
features that might make the universal application of one administrative
legal principle difficult, even within a single jurisdiction. For example,



1 See Julian Rivers, Proportionality and Variable Intensity of Review, 65 CAMBRIDGE
  L.J. 174, 174 (2006); Margit Cohn, Legal Transplant Chronicles: The Evolution of
  Unreasonableness and Proportionality Review of the Administration in the United
  Kingdom, 58 AM. J. COMP. L. 583, 583-85 (2010).
2 The spread of proportionality principle and their explanation, see Moshe Cohen-Eliya
  & Iddo Porat, Proportionality and the Culture of Justification, 59 AM. J. COMP. L. 463,
  464-74 (2011); Vicki C. Jackson, Constitutional Law in an Age of Proportionality,
  124 YALE L.J. 3094, 3096 (2015).
3 See Benedict Kingsbury et al., The Emergence of Global Administrative Law, 68 LAW
  & CONTEMP. PROBS. 15, 18 (2005).
102                                  《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


when there is high uncertainty regarding the environmental deterioration
caused by a new technology, it is not clear how to determine whether a
given regulation is necessary and proportional. Although the principle of
proportionality has been widely accepted as an objective principle to
restrain administrators from overly infringing on individual rights,
different social contexts and the distinctiveness of environmental cases
challenge the objective application of the principle.

      By analyzing judgments of environmental cases made by the
European Court of Justice (ECJ) and by the Administrative Court in
Taiwan, this article discusses the question of how different paths of legal
transplantation and the unique nature of environmental cases affect the
application of the principle of proportionality. In the following section,
this article briefly explores the path of legal transplantation and
acceptance of the principle of proportionality in two legal systems,
demonstrating the path and the context where the principle was
integrated into an existing legal system. The third and fourth sections
examine the application and interpretation of the principle of
proportionality on environmental cases. The third section suggests the
context of new democracy and how the progress of regional integration
affects the courts’ interpretation of the same legal doctrine. The fourth
section examines how the features of environmental cases affect the
application of the principle by the courts. The article argues that while
the principle of proportionality is widely purported to be an objective
legal principle, it is in fact not applied in a universally consistent way. It
changes over time and adapts to different social contexts and the varying
nature of cases.
An Unprincipled Principle?                                                             103


2. A Shared Principle of Administrative Law in
   Taiwan and the EU

      In Taiwan and the EU, the principle of proportionality has been
accepted as the governing principle of administrative law. The principle
itself, however, was not invented in these two jurisdictions. How has a
principle refined in German law been transplanted into Taiwan’s
administrative law while at the same time developing into the general
                                     4
guiding principle of the EU? Is it understood differently in these two
jurisdictions? Interestingly enough, the path and context of legal
transplantation was quite different, yet the two jurisdictions share similar
understandings of the principle of proportionality.

2.1 Taiwan: An Imported Constitutional Principle Becomes a
    Foundation of Administrative Law
      In Taiwan, the principle of proportionality is not a grass-roots legal
principle that can be found in its legal tradition. One cannot find any
provision enacting this principle in the Constitution of R.O.C of 1947. It
was borrowed by the Constitutional Court from German jurisprudence to
deal with the history of arbitrary exercise of government power by the
past authoritarian regime, which helped pave the path toward


4   The Principle of Proportionality aims to restrain the exercise of public authority from
    overly infringe individual rights. Similar idea can be found in some legal principles of
    other jurisdictions. For example, William Stuntz argues that the prohibition of cruel
    and unusual punishments could be plausibly read to imply a proportionality principle
    of sentencing. See William Stuntz, The Uneasy Relationship between Criminal
    Procedure and Criminal Justice, 107 YALE L.J. 1, 72-73 (1997); see also E. THOMAS
    SULLIVAN & RICHARD S. FRASE, PROPORTIONALITY PRINCIPLES IN AMERICAN LAW:
    CONTROLLING EXCESSIVE GOVERNMENT ACTIONS (2009). The principle of
    proportionality in this article specifically refers to the German-refined principle with
    three-step test.
104                                         《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


democratization. In addition to the need for legal doctrine to restrain
government power, the background study by early law scholars also
contributed to the transplant of the principle of proportionality. Many
early law students who studied abroad chose to pursue their master or
doctoral degree in Germany because of the relatively low tuition and
living expenses. Some of them became important scholars or Justice
later and are devoted to the introduction of the German Jurisprudence of
                                                         5
the proportionality principle to Taiwan.                     Through its continued
application in one interpretation after another, the principle has become
the most important principle in the practice of constitutional review in
Taiwan.

       The first constitutional interpretation that directly and literally
mentions the principle of proportionality is the J.Y. Interpretation No.
       6
409.       Interestingly, the court did not derive it from a specific


5 Before the term “the principle of proportionality” appeared in official Interpretation of
  Taiwanese Constitutional Court, textbooks of Constitutional Law and Administrative
  Law in Taiwan have mentioned the principle of proportionality as a general principle
  of law. Relevant studies please see, e.g., Tzung-Jen Tsai, Preliminary Research on the
  Principle of Proportionality of Public Law—Focus on German Law, 62 NCCU L.
  REV. 75, 77 (1999)（蔡宗珍，公法上之比例原則初論—以德國法的發展為中
  心 ， 政 大 法 學 評 論 ， 62 期 ， 頁 77 （ 1999 年 ））; Jau-Yuan Hwang, Judicial
  Standards of Review for Restrictions on Constitutional Rights: Comparative Analysis
  of the U.S. Categorized Multiple Tests Approach, 33(3) NTU L.J. 45, 53-54 (2004)
  （黃昭元，憲法權利限制的司法審查標準：美國類型化多元標準模式的比較分
  析，臺大法學論叢，33卷3期，頁53-54（2004年）                           ）. In addition, Wen-Chen Chang
  and Jiunn-Rong Yeh also found that, Justice who studied in Germany for master or
  doctoral degrees open cited German precedents in their opinions. See Wen-Chen
  Chang & Jiunn-Rong Yeh, The Use of Foreign Precedents by the Constitutional Court
  in Taiwan, paper presented at The Conference on the Use of Foreign Precedents by
  Constitutional Judges, Interest Group of International Association of Constitutional
  Law, London, at 10-11 (Nov. 14-15, 2008).
6 J.Y. Interpretation No. 409 (Taiwan). English translation please visit official website of
  Judicial Yuan, R.O.C., http://www.judicial.gov.tw/constitutionalcourt/EN/p03_01.asp?
  expno=409 (last visited Jun. 14, 2013). Because the principle of proportionality was
An Unprincipled Principle?                                                             105


constitutional provision or from the general spirit of the constitution, but
from the Land Act. The court first resorted to Article 48 of the Urban
Planning Act, which provides that “relevant organizations or
undertakings should, according to law, expropriate the land which has
been designated as reserve land for public facilities to be used by public
utilities.” The court then suggested that, “the state should still be
restricted by the principle of proportionality which is implied in the
relevant provisions of the Land Act and Article 49 of the Enforcement
Act of Land Act.” Without once mentioning proportionality, Article 49
of the Enforcement Act of Land Act prescribed that “in accordance with
the aims of the expropriation, land expropriation should be conducted in
such a way as to cause the minimum damage and to avoid encroachment
                              7
upon agricultural land.” Through an elaboration on this clause in the
regulation of existing Acts, the court introduced the principle of
proportionality, stating that all land expropriation must serve public
interest and should simultaneously be implemented so as to cause the
minimum amount of infringement on the property rights of individuals.

      After the J.Y Interpretation No. 409, the Constitutional Court
asserted a constitutional basis for the principle of proportionality through
the interpretation of Article 23 of the R.O.C. Constitution, which
prescribes that “[a]ll the freedoms and rights enumerated in the
preceding Articles shall not be restricted by law except by such as may



  derived from statutes in the J.Y. Interpretation No. 409, it is arguably the first case in
  which the Court introduced the “constitutional” principle. See also, Jau-Yuan Hwang,
  Development of Standards of Review by the Constitutional Court from 1996 to 2011:
  Reception and Localization of the Proportionality Principle, 42(2) NTU L.J. 215,
  218-219 (2013)（黃昭元，法官解釋審查標準之發展（1996-2011）                                 ：比例原則的
  繼受與在地化，臺大法學論叢，42卷2期，頁218-219（2013年）                                    ）.
7 J.Y. Interpretation No. 409 (Taiwan).
106                                      《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


be necessary to prevent infringement upon the freedoms of other
persons…” Based on the word “necessary” in this article, the court
developed the current jurisprudence of proportionality used to justify the
principle today.

      In J.Y. Interpretation No. 428, the Court was dealing with the
question about whether or not Article 25 of the Act Governing the
Administration of Post Offices, which provides the Post Office
compensate only for the loss of certain categories of registered mails and
parcels, is constitutional. The court referred to the principle of
proportionality and stated that, “Article 25 of the Act Governing the
Administration of Post Offices is formulated by taking into consideration
the balance among such factors as the fees charged, the nature of the
services, the operating cost, and the degree of injury to the interest of the
people, and is necessary for maintaining the operation of the postal
services and essential to the furtherance of the public interest. The
statute … is consistent with the principle of proportionality embodied in
                                    8
Article 23 of the Constitution.”

      In J.Y. Interpretation No. 476, the Constitutional Court reviewed the
constitutionality of capital punishment under special criminal laws and
further elaborated the content of the principle of proportionality in full in
                9
the following:

      “…these special criminal laws should be deemed consistent


8 J.Y. Interpretation No. 428 (Taiwan). English translation, please see Judicial Yuan,
  R.O.C., http://www.judicial.gov.tw/constitutionalcourt/EN/p03_01.asp?expno=428 (last
  visited Sep. 23, 2015).
9 J.Y. Interpretation No. 476 (Taiwan). English translation, please see Judicial Yuan,
  R.O.C., http://www.judicial.gov.tw/constitutionalcourt/EN/p03_01.asp?expno=476 (last
  visited Jun. 14, 2013).
An Unprincipled Principle?                                               107


     with the principle of proportionality (Verhältnismäßigkeits-
     prinzip) under Article 23 of the Constitution if the methods
     used to achieve such purposes are necessary to correct and
     prevent mistakes and are also reasonable actions to take even
     though they restrict the people’s fundamental rights. The
     balance between the means and ends is prescribed in these
     special criminal laws. In consideration of protecting legal
     interests, special criminal laws contrary to the regulations set
     forth in the general criminal laws should not be deprived of
     their legal value solely based on personal judgment. In addition,
     the special criminal laws will not be held unconstitutional
     solely because they may infringe upon people’s lives and
                                                        10
     physical freedom guaranteed by the Constitution.”

     The constitutional court elaborated the principle of proportionality
to include three concepts: appropriateness, necessity, and the principle of
proportionality in a narrow sense. In both interpretations, the English
translation specifically noted the phrase “Verhältnismäßigkeitsprinzip”
after the translated phrase “principle of proportionality.” Although the
court did not refer to the German concept directly in the original Chinese
version of J.Y. interpretations, the note of German in the English
translation implies one typical understanding that the principle was
borrowed from German jurisprudence. The Constitutional Court has
consistently applied the principle of proportionality to evaluate and
nullify various laws afterwards.

     The principle of proportionality was further inscribed as a
fundamental principle of administrative law with the enactment of the


10 Id.
108                                    《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


Administrative Procedure Act in 2000. Article 7 prescribes clearly that,
“[a]dministrative acts shall be performed in pursuance of the following
principles: 1) The method adopted must be helpful to the achievement of
the objectives thereof; 2) Where there are several alternative methods
which will lead to the same result in achievement of the objectives, the
one with the least harm to the rights and interest of the people shall be
adopted; and 3) The harm that may be caused by the method to be
adopted shall not be clearly out of balance against the interest of the
                                           11
objectives anticipated to be achieved.”

      Nowadays, the principle of proportionality is frequently applied to
evaluate the legality of administrative acts by administrative courts in
Taiwan.

2.2 The EU: The Community’s General Principle Derives
    from Legal Tradition
      The principle of proportionality is enshrined in EU law. Article 5 (4)
of the Treaty on European Union (TEU) of 2012 states that, “under the
principle of proportionality, the content and form of Union action shall
                                                                                 12
not exceed what is necessary to achieve the objectives of the Treaties.”
Accordingly, all actions taken by the EU should take the principle of
proportionality into consideration.

      Although prescribed in treaty, the root of the principle of
proportionality lies in the legal tradition of some member states. A
product of the interpretation of Platonic and Cicerian theory, the
principle of proportionality was codified in the late 18th Century and


11 XINGZHENG CHENGXU Fa (Administrative Procedure Act) art. 7 (2000) (Taiwan).
12 Article 5(4) of the Treaty on European Union.
An Unprincipled Principle?                                                          109


                                                            13
refined by the German courts in the 19th Century.                By the 1970s at the
latest, the German-refined principle had affected EU law. In the
Internationale Handelsgesellschaft case in 1970, the court wrote that, “a
public authority may not impose obligations on a citizen except to the
extent to which they are strictly necessary in the public interest to attain
                                      14
the purpose of the measure.”               The principle took further hold in
continental Europe after the Second World War when proportionality
became embedded in the new German constitution. The process of
integration and the frequent legal communication between EU members
have provided fertile soil for some jurisdictions that lack the tradition of
the principle to incorporate it into their own jurisprudence, since it has
                                                               15
become a central part of the EU’s supranational law.

      As a ground for review, the principle of proportionality was first
developed by the court to counter-balance the effects of market
regulation measures restricting economic freedom adopted under the
Treaty that established the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC
Treaty). In 1956 the Court referred to “a generally accepted rule of law
according to which the reaction by the high authority to illegal action
                                                          16
must be in proportion of the scale of that action.”

      It was then taken up by the European Court of Human Rights upon


13 Thomas Poole, Proportionality in Perspective (LSE Law, Society and Economy,
   Working Paper, 2010), http://www.lse.ac.uk/collections/law/wps/WPS2010-16_Poole.
   pdf.
14 Case 11/70, Internationale Handelsgesellschaft mbH v. Einfuhr - und Vorratsstelle für
   Getreide und Futtermittel [1970] ECR 1125.
15 It is arguably the Wednesbury unreasonableness doctrine in UK common law a milder
   version of the principle of proportionality. Cf. Paul Craig, Unreasonableness and
   Proportionality in UK Law, in THE PRINCIPLE OF PROPORTIONALITY IN THE LAWS OF
   EUROPE 85, 85-106 (Evelyn Ellis ed., 1999).
16 Case 8/55, Fedechar v. High Authority [1955-56] ECH 211, at 228.
110                                        《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


its founding in 1959 and later by the fledgling European Community as a
                                                               17
conceptual “meta principle of judicial governance”.                 The integration of
European countries triggered a convergence in national administrative
                                                                             18
law, leading to the “Europeanisation of administrative law.”                        In this
process the European Court of Justice adopted the principle of
                                                                               19
proportionality from German Law but has since made it its own.

      The TEU has not fully elaborated on its definition of “the principle
of proportionality.” The court, however, has explained the content in its
decisions. For example, in one case concerning a measure taken by the
European Community, the European Court of Justice (ECJ) explained
the full steps for proportionality test as follows:

      [T]he principle of proportionality … requires that measures
      adopted by Community institutions should not exceed the limits
      of what is appropriate and necessary in order to attain the
      legitimate objectives pursued by the legislation in question, and
      where there is a choice between several appropriate measures,
      recourse must be had to the least onerous, and the
      disadvantages caused must not be disproportionate to the aim
                  20
      pursued…



17 Alec Stone-Sweet & Jud Mathews, Proportionality, Judicial Review and Global
   Constitutionalism, in REASONABLENESS AND LAW 173, 192 (Giorgio Bongiovanni,
   Giovanni Sartor & Chiara Valentini eds., 2009).
18 See, e.g., KARL HEINZ LADEUR ED., THE EUROPEANISATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW:
   TRANSFORMING NATIONAL DECISION-MAKING PROCEDURES (2002).
19 The opinion shared by other author, see, e.g., ROBERT THOMAS, LEGITIMATE
   EXPECTATIONS AND PROPORTIONALITY IN ADMINISTRATIVE LAW 78 (2000).
20 Case C-331/48, The Queen v. Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and
   Secretary of State for Health, Fedesa et al. [1990] ECR I-4023, para 13. The Court
   referred to this paragraph in some subsequent cases, such as Pfizer case. See also Case
   T-13/99, Pfizer [2002] ECR II-3305, para. 411-13.
An Unprincipled Principle?                                                     111


     The ECJ understands the principle as a three-test principle. EU
legislation or administrative acts have to be appropriate, necessary, and
proportional to be legally valid. The principle of proportionality and the
three-step test are widely used and recognized in European law by the
ECJ now. The court now regards the principle of proportionality as a
general principle for EU law and all administrative measures taken by
              21
EU agencies.

2.3 The Shared Understanding of the Proportionality
    Principle
     Despite the different paths of transplantation, the principle of
proportionality operates similarly in Taiwan and the EU. To satisfy the
requirement of the principle of proportionality, an administrative
measure should be appropriate, necessary, and proportionate. The
appropriateness clause indicates that the legislation must be able to
achieve a proper purpose. In the context of administrative law, the
principle asks the administrative agency to choose an effective measure
to fulfill the purpose of the legislation. The necessity clause requires
administrative agencies to act in accordance with the law and consider
all the relevant elements in order to make sure that individuals suffer the
minimum burden. The principle of proportionality in a narrow sense
(proportionality stricto sensu) asks administrative bodies to ensure they
have legitimate purposes for their actions and then to balance the
damage to the rights of individuals and the interests of the administrative
purpose. If the damage to citizens’ rights outweighs the pursued interests



21 See Takis Tridmas, Proportionality in the European Community Law: Searching for
   the Appropriate Standard of Scrutiny, in THE PRINCIPLE OF PROPORTIONALITY IN THE
   LAWS OF EUROPE 65, 75 (Evelyn Ellis ed., 1999).
112                                  《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


of the measure, the measure could be unconstitutional. The third test,
proportionality stricto sensu, involves a fair balance between the
disadvantage suffered by the rights holders and the interests of the state
in pursuing its legitimate aims. That is to say interference with rights
needs to be proportionate to the policy aims that underlie them. The third
test is indispensable because legitimate state measures can still cause
excessive harm to individual rights. In some situations, an administrative
measure can overly infringe on individual rights even though it is the
only effective and necessary measure. It is after a finding of necessity
that careful balancing and weighing will come into play.

      Core to the principle of proportionality is interest-balancing and
cost-benefit analysis. In order to analyze the costs and benefits and make
a balance, in applying the principle of proportionality the court has to
conduct a two-stage test. In the first stage, the court has to identify the
protected right or interest first and then identify the extent to which the
right is interfered with or restricted. The next step is to identify the
reasons and interest pursued for that restriction.

      The second stage is to assess whether the interference was
excessive, and this balancing of interests is done based on the
proportionality test. The court first assesses whether the measure in
question was a useful, suitable or effective means of achieving the
pursued objective. Secondly, the court examines whether the measure
was necessary to achieve the objective, or whether it could have been
achieved with a less restrictive alternative. Third, when the measure is
the least restrictive, the court examines whether the measure has an
excessive impact on individuals’ rights.

      Nowadays, the principle of proportionality is regarded as a general
An Unprincipled Principle?                                                             113


principle—a principle that is inherent to the legal system in both Taiwan
and the EU. Following a general principle, rather than merely a
methodological rule, the court is bound by the fact that all cases that are
of the same nature would have to be decided in the same way. In other
                                                                   22
words, the court is bound by how it reaches the result.

     The acceptance of the principle of proportionality and its shared
understanding requires an explanation: How can we identify a successful
application of the principle of proportionality? Why does this doctrine fit
the needs of different countries and jurisdictions?

     One major argument focuses on the nature of administrative law
and its need for justification. For example, Kingbury suggests that, the
central concern of modern administrative law is how to curb the
discretion of administrative agencies without straightjacketing modern
administration. The principle of proportionality has been regarded as a
successful doctrine and useful tool for the balancing of agency discretion
and protection of human rights. The principle of proportionality is
widely accepted, not only because of foreign imitation or regional
integration but also because of the substantive value of administrative
                                                              23
law’s publicness as well as the need of justification.

     From this aspect we may better understand the spread of the
proportionality principle in Taiwan and the EU. For Taiwan, the progress
of democratization created the space for more expansive judicial
                 24
interpretations.      Concerning the poor record of human rights violations


22 Tor-Inge Harbo, The Function of the Proportionality Principle in EU Law, 16 EUR. L.
   J. 158, 159 (2010).
23 Benedict Kingsbury, The Concept of ‘Law’ in Global Administrative Law, 20 EUR. J.
   INT’L L. 23, 32-33 (2009); see also Cohen-Eliya & Porat, supra note 2, at 464-65.
24 See Jiunn-Rong Yeh, Constitutional Reform and Democratization in Taiwan: 1945-
114                                       《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


and abuse of power by the government, the Constitutional Court, as has
been the case with many other courts in new democracies, was aware of
the importance of restraining the power of the government. When the
Constitution’s provisions and domestic jurisprudence at that time
provided little inspiration, leading Taiwanese legal scholars and some of
the Court’s Justices with German educational background introduced the
doctrine of proportionality and required administrative authority to
                        25
justify their actions.       For the EU, with the path of integration, the EU
exercises more power that could lead to restraining the power of member
states and rights of their people. The legal tradition of justification thus
inscribes the doctrine into EU law.

      Yet some others believe it is the flexibility of the principle that
serves the need of a developing legal system and their courts so that the
principle can be widely accepted. Proportionality is a standard-based
doctrine that allows for flexibility in the development of law, and its
empty concept provides the court the opportunity to do whatever they
      26
want.

      How do courts adapt the doctrine to serve the need of development
of law for different social contexts and different natures of cases despite
the same belief in justifying administrative action?




   2000, in TAIWAN’S MODERNIZATION IN GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 47, 52-60 (Peter Chow
   ed., 2002).
25 See, e.g., Tom Ginsburg, Constitutional Courts in East Asia: Understanding Variation,
   3 J. COM. L. 80, 83 (2008). See Ming-Sung Kuo, From Administrative Law to
   Administrative Legitimation? 61 INT’L & COMP. L.Q. 855, 855-59 (2012). One study
   finds the foreign educational background of Justice can explain the frequent use of
   German legal doctrine in Taiwan. Chang & Yeh, supra note 5, at 14-15.
26 Cohen-Eliya & Porat, supra note 2, at 466.
An Unprincipled Principle?                                             115


3. The Proportionality Principle for a New
   Democracy and for the European Integration

     Taiwan and the EU both accept the principle of proportionality as a
general principle of law, yet different social contexts result in different
applications. Taiwan imported the principle in the process of
democratization, but the lack of a legal tradition behind the principle
often leads the court to applying the principle incompletely,
inconsistently and in a confusing manner. In the process of regional
integration, the EU employs the principle strategically to promote
integration and applies it differently to measures of the EU as a whole
and measures of individual member states.

3.1 Taiwan: A Young Principle in a New Democracy
     The acceptance of the principle of proportionality is relatively new
to Taiwan. The proportionality principle was inscribed in the
Administrative Procedure Act in 1999 as an administrative legal
principle. It was an effort to respond to the progress of democratization
and prevent the abuse of power by the government that haunted the
Taiwanese people during the past authoritarian regime. The principle has
rapidly become the foundational rule for administrative law. Yet, the
content and meaning of the principle have not yet been fully understood
in Taiwan’s judiciary.

     Despite the short period of history for legal transplantation, the
legacy of the past authoritarian regime still substantially affects the
administrative court. Rather than protecting human rights, the
administrative court before democratization tended to endorse the
116                                         《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


                                                                                27
legitimacy of executive orders and served political interests.                       In the
early period of democratization, judges in administrative courts were not
well trained; some of them were executive officers or judges of military
courts. The administrative courts were widely criticized for their
tendency to favor the decisions of agencies and downplay the interests of
citizens. This lingering mentality may deter the court from exercising its
power to scrutinize agencies and make decisions strictly according to the
principle of proportionality.

      Environmental cases are no exception. An overview of
environmental cases heard by administrative courts in Taiwan indicates
three shortcomings of the review process in applying the principle:
incomplete understanding, confusion with other legal doctrines, and
unclear standards for balancing interests.

      3.1.1 Incomplete Understanding
      The principle of proportionality has become one of the most
frequently applied legal principles in environmental law cases in Taiwan.

27 Taiwan adopts a dual litigation system. All disputes arising out of legal relations in the
   area of the public law are tried by administrative courts, and controversies arising out
   of relations under private laws are tried at courts of general jurisdiction. See J.Y.
   Interpretation No. 448 (Taiwan). During the authoritarian era, the administrative court
   can review only cases regarding revocation of an administrative disposition and
   constructed the concept of disposition, lawfulness and standing to sue narrowly. The
   XINGZHENG SUSONG FA (Administrative Litigation Act) (1998) (Taiwan) expanded
   the types of administrative litigation. With the effort of the Constitutional Court and
   Administrative Court, the exercise of government power can be effectively restraint
   by the court. For example, before the enactment of the XINGZHENG SUSONG FA, the
   rate of judgment in favor of the plaintiff was only 7%. The rate grew to 12-15% after
   2000, indicating that courts are more willing to substantially examine the legality of
   government act. See Wen-Chen Chang, Courts and Judicial Reform in Taiwan:
   Gradual Transformations Towards the Guardian of Constitutionalism and Rule of
   Law, in ASIAN COURTS IN CONTEXT 143, 176 (Jiunn-Rong Yeh & Wen-Chen Chang
   eds., 2015).
An Unprincipled Principle?                                                     117


Yet ironically, plaintiffs in environmental cases raising the claim of
proportionality often fail to clearly define the principle and its
application. In many cases, even the court fails to present its reasons for
applying the principle in concrete cases.

    Take the Supreme Administrative Court 85 Pan No. 127 Judgment
( 最 高 行 政 法 院 85 年 度 判 字 第 127 號 判 決 , hereinafter “Animal
Husbandry case”) as an example. The plaintiff asked for permission to
run an animal husbandry business on a piece of farmland. The authority
                                                                          28
denied the application on the basis of water pollution prevention.             The
plaintiff believed that the authority did not understand the situation and
thus applied the law incorrectly, yet the plaintiff alleged that the decision
of the authority “violated the principle of proportionality.” Whether the
agency correctly investigates the facts and interprets the law is hardly
relevant to the principle of proportionality, but the plaintiff challenged
the administrative decision in the name of proportionality without further
explanation. Even more interestingly, in the judgment, the court simply
stated that the farmland was within the regulated area of water
preservation and then concluded the decision satisfied the principle of
                 29
proportionality.      In this case, the plaintiff and the court both mentioned
the principle of proportionality, indicating that they recognized the
importance and the acceptance of the legal doctrine. However, it seems
that neither the plaintiff nor the court correctly applied the principle
despite mentioning it so blatantly.

     The court sometimes makes judgments based on proportionality,
but fails to provide sufficient analysis and reasoning. Take the example


28 Zuigao Xingzheng Fayuan [Sup. Admin. Ct.] 85 Pan No. 127 (1996) (Taiwan).
29 Id.
118                                    《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


of waste disposal cases. In the Supreme Administrative Court 92 Pan No.
1754 Judgment (最高行政法院92年度判字第1754號判決, hereinafter
“Waste Disposal case”), the appellee was fined 6,000 NTD for
improperly disposed waste. The court concluded that the measures taken
by the administrative agency do not significantly restrict the appellee’s
right, thereby satisfying the requirement of the proportionality
          30
principle.     The court tends to sustain an administrative measure if it
may help achieve a legitimate purpose.

      Arguments such as those in the cases mentioned above are common
in the judgments of administrative courts in Taiwan. In comparison to
constitutional cases made by the Constitutional Court of Taiwan, the use
of the principle of proportionality used by plaintiffs and judges in
administrative courts are not carefully elaborated or correctly understood.
Whenever people make claims against agency decisions, they simply
link whatever argument they give to proportionality. Then, when the
court denies these claims, they in turn often state that the administrative
decision the claim is made against does not violate the principle of
proportionality. Despite this routine invocation of the principle of
proportionality, considerations regarding the goal, affected interests, and
the proportionality between them are usually absent from the legal
discussion when the principle is applied.

      3.1.2 A Principle Confused with Other Principles
      The second problem is that the court sometimes confuses the
proportionality principle with other legal doctrines. The three legal
doctrines that are sometimes confused with the proportionality principle



30 Zuigao Xingzheng Fayuan [Sup. Admin. Ct.] 92 Pan No. 1754 (2003) (Taiwan).
An Unprincipled Principle?                                                     119


are the principle of undue burden, the principle of prohibiting improper
connection, and principle of legal reservation (Gesetzesvorbehalt).

     In the Kaohsiung Administrative High Court 92 Su-Geng No. 80
Judgment (高雄高等行政法院92年度訴更字第80號判決, hereinafter
“Time-limited Pollution Reducing case”), it seems that the court confuses
the principle of undue burden with the proportionality principle. The
plaintiff argued that the demand on them by the EPA to reduce pollution
in 20 days is illegal for such demand fails to satisfy the principle of
                  31
proportionality.       Yet the plaintiff then went on to say that, considering
the cost and time of renewing technology and facilities, it is almost
impossible to comply with the demand in time. The court pointed out
that, whether or not the time-limited requirement is appropriate should
be examined on the basis of the situation in which it was demanded. The
court then concluded that, the decision made by the EPA satisfies the
proportionality principle, for its deadline was not beyond reasonable
             32
expectation.

     If an administrative requirement is beyond reasonable expectation,
                                             33
it may cause undue burden to citizens.            It may not necessarily violate
the principle of proportionality. However, both the plaintiff and the court
suggested that a measure that is beyond reasonable expectation is
disproportional. It is true that, an administrative measure that is
impossible to comply with can be inappropriate, meaning that the


31 Kaohsiung Gaodeng Xingzheng Fayuan [Kaohsiung Admin. High Ct.] 92 Su-Geng
   No. 80 (2003) (Taiwan).
32 Id.
33 The principle of undue burden prohibits the government from taking measures that
   might cause significant difficulty or expenses beyond reasonable expectation to
   citizens. When government demands a citizen a legal obligation that is beyond
   reasonable expectation, it may violate the principle of undue burden.
120                                          《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


decision in question can be disproportional and beyond reasonable
expectation at the same time. Yet, without additional analysis and
explanation, it is hard to tell whether the court failed to distinguish the
two principles.

      In another controversial case, the Supreme Administrative Court
100 Pan No. 1022 Judgment (最高行政法院100年度判字第1022號判
決, hereinafter “An-Kang Incineration Plant case”),34 the court applied
the principle in a way similar to the principle of prohibiting improper
              35
connection.        The case was about whether the decision to not proceed to
carry out a second stage Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) was
        36
illegal.     One of the most controversial issues was whether the second
                                                                             37
stage EIA can be skipped “for the cause of convenience.”                          The court
believed that the decision on whether to proceed to the second stage of
the EIA should be based on professional evaluation. In this case, if the
EIA commission fails to consider necessary elements, or considers
elements that should not be included, the decision is arbitrary. Moreover,
if the commission gives too much weight to a single element and
undermines the precedented proportion of weight accorded to an
analysis of a specific profession without due cause, the decision violates


34 Zuigao Xingzheng Fayuan [Sup. Admin. Ct.] 100 Pan No. 1022 (2011) (Taiwan).
35 The principle of prohibiting improper connection means that the exercise of public
   authority should have proper connection with its purpose. The XINGZHENG CHENGXU
   FA (Administrative Procedure Act) (2000) (Taiwan) does not prescribe this principle,
   but it is recognized as a general principle of administrative law by the courts. See, e.g.,
   J.Y. Interpretation No. 612 (Taiwan).
36 According to the HUANJING YINGXIANG PINGGU FA (Environmental Impact
   Assessment Act) (2003) (Taiwan), a developer should prepare an environmental
   impact statement for the phrase one environmental assessment. If the review suggests
   that the project may significantly impact the environment, developer should prepare a
   more detailed assessment report for the phrase two.
37 Id.
An Unprincipled Principle?                                                   121


the principle of proportionality as well. Concerning the case, the court
concluded that, the EIA commission’s decision failed to properly
consider elements that may impact the environment and placed
unwarranted weight on the element of convenience in their
considerations, thus violating the principle of proportionality. The court
further elaborated that the decision to refuse to proceed to carrying out a
second phase EIA not only infringed on the procedural and substantial
rights of residents but also damaged public interests, because it was
unjust to the residents who were boycotting the construction expecting
that the proper procedure would follow before construction could begin.

     The court believed that each professional subject should be
considered in proportion and required the authorities to follow the rules
of proportionality when making EIA decisions. The court invalidated the
decision to not require a second stage EIA because the EIA
commission’s decision was primarily based on the consideration of
“convenience” and “urgency,” which should not be so heavily weighted.

     Yet, instead of evaluating the proportionality between purpose and
means, the court was actually saying that the EIA commission’s decision
should exclude an irrelevant basis of consideration and instead base its
decision on a reasonable consideration of all professional opinions. As
one scholar commented, the application of the principle in this case
concerns not the balance between means and ends, but the interpretation
of legal provision and facts. It is an issue of improper connection
                                                                     38
between administrative discretion and the elements considered.            In this


38 Chien-Liang Lee, Environmental Impact Assessment Review and the Principle of
   Proportionality: The Meaning and Concerns of the Supreme Administrative Court
   100 Pan No. 1022 Judgment, 185 TAIWAN L.J. 101, 109 (2011)（李建良，環境法實
   務專題講座（四）          ：環評審查與比例原則—最高行政法院100年度判字第1022
122                                    《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


judgment, however, the court interpreted the principle of proportionality
as the principle of prohibiting improper connection.

      In another case, the Supreme Administrative Court 89 Pan No. 3272
Judgment (最高行政法院89年度判字第3272號判決, hereinafter “Air
Pollution Penalty case”), it seems the court confuses the principle of
                                                          39
legal reservation with the proportionality principle.          The court suggests
that, if the plaintiff polluted the air and the measure taken by the
administrative agency was within the discretion authorized by the law,
the measure is considered “necessary” to maintain social order and
improve public welfare. The way the court determined whether the
measure was “necessary” under the proportionality principle was by
seeing whether the measure taken had gone beyond the powers
authorized by the law. Yet, the issue of legal authorization derives from
the demand of rule of law, which requires all administrative measures to
be made on the formal basis of law. The requirement of formal legal
authorization is different from the principle of proportionality that
emphasizes substantive legitimacy between purpose and means.

      3.1.3 Inconsistent Identification of Interests
      The principle of proportionality requires each administrative
decision to be made with a reasonable balance between the pursued
public interest and infringed individual rights, requiring all means
undertaken to be proportionate to the objective. Accordingly, the court
should compare the interests pursued by an administrative measure with


   號判決的意義與隱憂，台灣法學雜誌，185期，頁109（2011年）
                                   ）.
39 The principle of legal reservation means that administrative actions restraining
   people’s rights should be prescribed by law. Many Interpretations made by the
   Constitutional Court of Taiwan had emphasized this principle. See, e.g., J.Y.
   Interpretation No. 380, 394 (Taiwan).
An Unprincipled Principle?                                                      123


the damage it would cause. Yet, the judgments of environmental cases
often fail to appropriately incorporate its applications of the principle of
proportionality.

     In the Supreme Administrative Court 89 Pan No. 3272 Judgment
(最高行政法院89年度判字第3272號判決, hereinafter “Chemical
Factory Penalty case”), the proportionality principle is used to evaluate
whether the punishment is proportional to the damage caused by the
         40
plaintiff.    The plaintiff owned a chemical factory that was investigated
by the EPA and fined 300,000 NTD for its illegal emission of air
pollutants. When the plaintiff failed to improve the facility and
manufacturing process, the EPA continued to fine it on a daily basis,
amounting to a total of 1,800,000 NTD. The plaintiff brought the suit to
the court, saying that the EPA should evaluate the degree of pollution
and the protected interests and choose the measure causing the least
harm according to the principle of proportionality. The plaintiff believed
that the pollution created by their factory was not serious and should not
be so heavily fined for it. The plaintiff thus challenged the measure in
court by claiming the fine violated the principle of proportionality. The
plaintiff did not examine whether the purpose of the administrative
measure overweighed its damage to the plaintiff but instead looked at the
amount of pollution caused as the basis for the degree of the
administrative punishment. The plaintiff’s approach seems to be an
incorrect application of the principle of proportionality. The primary
purpose of administrative punishment is to ensure compliance with
administrative law. Sanctioning the violation of administrative
regulations should be regarded as the method to achieve the purpose of



40 Zuigao Xingzheng Fayuan [Sup. Admin. Ct.] 89 Pan No. 3272 (2000) (Taiwan).
124                                    《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


compliance. The degree of violation can be considered when deciding
the punishment, but addressing the degree of violation alone is not the
purpose of the administrative measure under the Article 7 of the
Administrative Procedure Act. Although the degree of pollution
produced by the plaintiff is one important consideration in the choice of
administrative measures, it is not equivalent to the entire purpose of the
          41
measure.

3.2 EU: A Deep-rooted Principle in the Context of Regional
    Integration
      With a long history of applying the principle of proportionality,
judgments produced by the ECJ generally provide more detailed
reasoning for how the court applied the principle in concrete contexts.
The understanding of the principle of proportionality presented in the
court’s judgments mostly adheres to the original definition devised by
scholars. Yet when applying the principle in cases concerning the
legality of EU administrative action and cases concerning the legality of
measures taken by EU member states, the court seems to differentiates
the standard of review and the purpose, making the principle not
coherent.

      Although the Treaty of European Union was not passed until 1991,
the principle of proportionality had been prevalent prior to that in
European countries. Despite the fact that Article 5 of the EC Treaty
regulates community institutions only, the court has been applying the
principle both to community and national measures (when applying


41 In the judgment, the court considered the fine as default surcharge rather than
   administrative punishment and concluded that the amount of fine should be
   comparable to the degree of failed compliance of the plaintiff. Id.
An Unprincipled Principle?                                                         125


community law) in regards to both legislative and administrative action.
The court requires that all administrative acts or decisions and all
                                                                              42
legislation conform to the general principle of proportionality.

     The Fedesa case reflects the way the ECJ understands and applies
the principle. The judgment states that “by virtue of that principle, the
lawfulness of the prohibition of an economic activity is subject to the
condition that the prohibitory measures are appropriate and necessary in
order to achieve the objectives legitimately pursued by the legislation in
question; when there is a choice between several appropriate measures,
recourse must be the least onerous, and the disadvantages caused must
                                                       43
not be disproportionate to the aims pursued.”

     3.2.1 Strategic Application for the Sake of Integration
     The progress of integration affects the interpretation of legal
doctrines. In addition to its traditional function of restraining
government power, the proportionality principle in EU law is also used
to prevent national constitutional review from trumping EU law.

     The Internationale Handelsgesellschaft case was the first case that
applied the principle at the EU level. Its application was made in the
context of common agricultural policy. As the court put it, “respect for
fundamental rights forms an integral part of the general principles of law
protected by the Court of Justice. The protection of such rights, whilst
inspired by the constitutional traditions common to the Member States,
must be ensured within the framework of the structure and objectives of


42 Protocol (No. 30) on the application of the principles of subsidiarity and
   proportionality (1997).
43 Case C-331/48, The Queen v. Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and
   Secretary of State for Health, Fedesa et al. [1990] ECR I-4023, para 13.
126                                      《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


                   44
the community.”         In order to prevent the supremacy of EU law being
undermined by challenges from national law regarding fundamental
rights, the ECJ adopted fundamental rights and proportionality as
principles of EU law, attempting to strengthen the constitutional
credentials of the EU. In some cases, the interests of the community
mingle with individual rights during the application of the
proportionality principle.

      3.2.2 Different Standards for the EU and Its Member States
      In order to endorse the goal of regional integration, the ECJ seems
to adopt different standards of scrutiny depending on whether it is
applying the principle of proportionality to the EU or to an individual
member state. The ECJ tends to support the measures adopted by EU
institutions and reviews them with less strict standards, while it strictly
examines administrative decisions made by member states.

      In the Fedesa case, the court asserted that “with regard to judicial
review of compliance with those conditions it must be stated that in
matters concerning the common agricultural policy the Community
legislature has a discretionary power which corresponds to the political
responsibilities given to it by Articles 40 and 43 of the Treaty.
Consequently, the legality of a measure adopted in the sphere can be
affected only if the measure is manifestly inappropriate having regard to
                                                                               45
the objective which the competent institution is seeking to pursue.”                In
one judgment, the court repeats the argument by saying that, “[w]ith
regard to judicial review of the conditions for application of such a


44 Case 10/70, Internationale Handelsgesellschaft, bH v. Einfuhr-und Vorratsstelle für
   Getreide und Futtermittel [1070] ECR 1125, at 3.
45 Case C-331/88, Fedesa and Others [1990] ECR I-4023.
An Unprincipled Principle?                                                      127


principle, having regard to the broad discretion which the Community
legislature is allowed in an area such as that involved in the present case,
which entails political, economic and social choices on its part, and in
which it is called upon to undertake complex assessments, the legality of
a measure adopted in that area can be affected only if the measure is
manifestly inappropriate having regard to the objective which the
                                                 46
competent institution is seeking to pursue.”

     The ECJ suggests the court should opt for a less rigid standard of
                                                                              47
review in certain fields where political responsibility is involved.               It
seems that the court applies a highly deferential or marginal test,
examining whether a certain decision or measure is “manifestly
inappropriate” or is “vitiated by a manifest error.”

     Yet, in certain other cases, especially involving measures that might
undermine the EU goal of economic integration by member states, the
court adopts a much stricter test. The court requires the member states to
demonstrate the necessity of the chosen instruments and the importance
of the aims pursued. For example, in Danish Bottles case, the interests
                                                                  48
evaluated by the ECJ are between the EU and Demark.                    The Danish
government approved a stringent regulatory measure, which requires
beer and soft drinks producers to use re-usable containers approved by
the Danish government only. Some drink companies believed the
measure violates EU law. EU prohibits the restriction on the free
movement of goods for the interest of an integrated market. The


46 Judgment of The Court (Third Chamber) 12 January 2006, Case C-504/04.
47 Case C-535/03, The Queen on the application of: Unitymark Ltd and North Sea
   Fishermen’s Organisation v. Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs 23
   March 2006.
48 Case 302/86, Commission v. Demark [1988] ECR 4607; [1989] 1 CMLR 619.
128                                《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


Commission argued that the Danish rules are contrary to the principle of
proportionality because other less restrictive means can also achieve the
aim of environmental protection.

      The court endorsed the deposit and return system, viewing it as
proportionate and necessary to achieve the aims. As for the approval
requirements, the court found it disproportionate. The court believed that,
the producer would have to purchase already approved containers, which
would involve substantial costs according to Danish law, making
importation difficult. The court concluded that if a foreign manufacturer
could comply with the Danish re-use policy by establishing its own
system, the approval system was not necessary and did not violate the
EC principle of free trade. However, the judgment was not only based on
the degree of rights infringement or the proportion between damage and
benefits. In this case, the court changed the balance by adding the EU
interests of free trade on the infringed right of manufacturer. The
infringed rights along with the interests of the EU exceed the pursued
interest, and the court thus held the measure disproportionate. As the
court put it, “it is therefore necessary to examine whether all the
restrictions which the contested rules impose on the free movement of
                                                                       49
goods are necessary to achieve the objectives pursued by those rules.”

      The original meaning of the proportionality principle is to balance
the pursued interests and the infringement of individual rights. In pursuit
of the goal of regional integration, however, the interpretation of the
principle has to be compromised with the community goal, so that the
principle sometimes even becomes a tool to promote deeper integration
at the expense of individual rights. The interpretation and application of


49 Id. para. 17.
An Unprincipled Principle?                                               129


the principle have thus been criticized as inconsistent and arbitrary.



4. Adapting to Environmental Cases in Taiwan and
   the EU

     Key features of environmental cases are uncertainty, multiple and
conflicting interests, and the need for a future-oriented perspective.
These features also challenge the objectivity of the proportionality
principle. Interestingly, the principle has been adapted to environmental
cases in Taiwan and the EU in different ways.

4.1 The     Proportionality                Principle         Confronting
    Environmental Cases
     The distinctiveness of environmental cases may also affect the
application of the principle by courts in the two jurisdictions. The
principle of proportionality is a way to evaluate and balance interests of
a specific administrative measure or legislation. For the balancing to be
effective and objective, there are some pre-conditions, such as a
specified goal and knowledge of the means and ends. Since
environmental cases tend to feature uncertainty, complicated interests,
and the necessity for a forward-looking perspective, they may bring
challenges to the application of the proportionality principle.

     4.1.1 Uncertainty in Environmental Issues
     First, the uncertainty of environmental issues is usually high.
“Uncertainty” refers to cases in which the probability of alternative
future scenarios cannot be determined. Robert Duncan suggests three
components that contribute to environmental uncertainty: 1) the lack of
130                                     《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


information regarding the environmental factors associated with a given
decision-making situation; 2) not knowing the outcome of a specific
decision in terms of how [insert what could be lost] could be lost if the
decision was incorrect; 3) inability to assign probabilities with any
degree of confidence with regard to how environmental factors are going
to affect the success or failure of the decision unit in performing its
          50
function.

      In the presence of uncertainty, the proportionality principle would
balance an ex ante measure of policy benefits with an ex ante measure of
policy costs. When probabilities are unavailable, it is not obvious how
the balance can be calculated. A scientific warning may turn out to be
valid after being ignored at first, and it can also be heeded but turn out to
have been unwarranted. Both mistakes depend on the policy chosen ex
                                                                                 51
ante and the scientific finding that turns out to be true ex post.
Moreover, the assessment of appropriateness and necessity also depends
on the knowledge available. When the knowledge available to
practitioners and policy makers alike is fragmentary and not systemized,
the effectiveness of regulation is difficult to assess.

      One commentator has questioned how we can weigh whether such
potential damage to human health or environment is disguised by a
                                               52
larger or smaller degree of uncertainty.            The proportionality principle


50 Robert B. Duncan, Characteristics of Organizational Environments and Perceived
   Environmental Uncertainty, 17(3) ADMIN. SCI. Q. 313, 318 (1972).
51 Terrence Iverson & Charles Perrings, Precaution and Proportionality in the
   Management of Global Environmental Change, 22 GLOBAL ENVT’L CHANGE 161,
   165 (2012).
52 Hannes Veines, Determination of the Level of Environmental Protection and the
   Proportionality of Environmental Measures in Community Law, IX JURIDICA INT’L 89,
   95 (2004).
An Unprincipled Principle?                                              131


turns out to be a mechanism for trade-off: how much cost you would
accept to exchange for the expected interests. The more resources
society commits to environmental protection, the more likely it is that
                                    53
unnecessary costs also increase.

     4.1.2 Complicated Interests and Competing Values
     The proportional principle is powerful in the single objective case.
However, the difficulty of identifying interests and conflicting values
also tests the applicability of the principle of proportionality.
Environmental regulation involves competing values, which cannot
always be translated into clearly defined rights or interests to be
                          54
objectively balanced.          The application of the three-step test of
proportionality is based on the specified interests pursued and infringed.
In environmental legal issues, several difficulties may be encountered
during the operation of the proportionality three-step test. For example,
complicated environmental interests may not be identified, calculated or
fairly represented through rights-holders. How much does an occupied
reef island cost? How do we calculate the costs and benefits of the
construction of a nuclear power plant on an island? One might find the
answer depends on not any objective calculation but some incompatible
division of ideology or belief.

     Moreover, the interest of environmental protection is always
intertwined with the need for development. This feature is present in the
guiding legal principles—the principle of sustainable development—of
environmental law. Both Taiwan and the EU embrace the principle of


53 Id.
54 Laurence Tribe, Ways Not to Think about Plastic Tree: New Foundations for
   Environmental Law, 83 YALE L.J. 1315, 1318 (1974).
132                                     《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


sustainable development. In Taiwan, Section 2, Article 10 of the R.O.C
Constitutional Amendment states, “Environmental and ecological
protection shall be given equal consideration with economic and
technological development.” Article 3 of the Basic Environment Act also
states that “economic, technological and social development shall
equally emphasize environmental protection based on long-term national
           55
interests.”     The EU also incorporates other values into environmental
policy in addition to the principle of proportionality. Article 3.3 TEU
states that the Union “shall work for the sustainable development of
Europe based on balanced economic growth and price stability, a highly
competitive social market economy, aiming at full employment and
social progress, and a high level of protection and improvement of the
quality of the environment.”

      Sustainable development principles reflect the complexity of
environmental issues and the compromises inherent in environmental
decision-making.

      Environmental cases always involve multiple goals and interests,
making the evaluation of proportionality difficult. Veines suggests that,
in assessing environmental regulations, “not only the benefits and costs
                                             56
but also values must be weighed.”                 Tribe also argues, “analytic
techniques can be of virtually no use outside the few situations (rarely
encountered in the environmental field) where one is optimizing a single,
                                                                       57
well-defined objective subject to agreed-upon constraints.”




55 HUANJING JIBEN FA (Basic Environment Act) art. 3 (2002) (Taiwan).
56 Veines, supra note 52, at 95.
57 Tribe, supra note 54, at 1322.
An Unprincipled Principle?                                           133



     4.1.3 A Forward-looking Perspective
     Third, resolving environmental cases require a forward-looking
perspective, which also challenges the application of the proportionality
principle. The principle of proportionality is basically a retrospective,
rather than ex nunc principle. The court can objectively examine the
proportionality of administrative measures only if the interests pursued
and infringed are known.

     Environmental protection concerns future generations and requires
a forward-looking perspective. Due to the uncertainty and cumulative
character of environmental cases, there often exists a time lag between
the human behavior and the moment at which the problem caused by
this behavior becomes clear. Take the RCA case in Taiwan as an
example. The U.S. company RCA (Radio Corporation of America) was
established in 1919 and closed in 1986 when General Electric took over.
Decades later, it was found to have dumped toxic wastes at its Taoyuan
factory, polluting the soil and underground water and leading to
alarmingly frequent reports of cancer among workers.

     A multitude of international and domestic sources have
acknowledged that the actions of present generations can interfere with
the needs of future generations. To address this situation, legal
documents commonly highlight the interests of future generations and
state that they should receive attention alongside those of present
generations. For example, Article 3 of the Basic Environment Act of
Taiwan also states that sustainable development means satisfying
contemporary needs without sacrificing the ability of future generations
to satisfy their needs. Environmental regulation thus pursues long-term
interests for future generations.
134                                      《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


      The legal principle that best highlights the forward-looking aspect
of environmental law is the precautionary principle. The precautionary
principle emphasizes avoidance of potentially damaging actions even
when there is uncertainty about the consequence of those actions.
Section 2, Article 174 of the Treaty Establishing the European
Community emphasizes the precautionary principle in forming
environmental policy, stating that “Community policy on the
environment shall aim at a high level of protection taking into account
the diversity of situations in the various regions of the Community. It
shall be based on the precautionary principle and on the principles that
preventive action should be taken, that environmental damage should as
                                                                             58
a priority be rectified at source and that the polluter should pay.”

      The enactment of the precautionary principle stresses the need to
look ahead in environmental policy-making rather than taking the
retrospective perspective more typical in the application of the
proportionality principle. The requirement of a future-oriented
perspective makes the interest-balance of the proportionality more
difficult. When interests cannot be evaluated using the same timeline,
cost and benefit analysis is difficult.

4.2 Adapting to Environmental Cases in Taiwan
      In order to deal with the distinctive features of environmental cases,
the courts of Taiwan adapt the principle of proportionality in at least
three ways: shifting standard of review, procedural proportionality, and
proportional consideration on conflicting interests.




58 Treaty Establishing the European Community, The Section 2, Article 174.
An Unprincipled Principle?                                                             135



     4.2.1 Shifting Standard of Review
     The first way for the court to adapt the principle to environmental
cases is the through the choice of standard of review. The court does not
apply the same standard of review consistently. Only occasionally will
the court take uncertainty into consideration and review cases with less
strict standard when considering the proportionality of the involved
measure. While in some other cases, the court applies the principle in a
stricter way that ignores the distinctive features of environmental cases.

  Taipei High Administrative Court 100 Su No. 1349 Judgment (臺北
高等行政法院100年度訴字第1349號判決, hereinafter “Concentrated
Townhouses Construction case) is an example where the court adopted a
                                     59
less strict standard of review.             In order to protect the productivity of
farms, Article 18 of the Agricultural Development Act regulates the
construction of farmhouses in agricultural lands. The order of the
Council of Agriculture provides that, “in order to protect farm lands
from being excessively and improperly used and to sustain good farms
for agricultural production, concentrated townhouses cannot be
constructed in specific agricultural zones.” Both individual farmhouses
and concentrated townhouse developments need to apply for approval
                                       60
from the competent authorities.              The plaintiffs in this case were famers
who applied to the Hsin-Chu County Government for the construction of

59 Taipei Gaodeng Xingzheng Fayuan [Taipei Admin. High Ct.] 100 Su No. 1349 (2011)
   (Taiwan).
60 NONGYE FAZHAN TIAOLI (Agricultural Development Act) art. 18 (2000) (Taiwan)
   provides that, “farmers, who acquire agricultural lands after the enactment of this
   revised Act of January 4, 2000 and do not possess a farmhouse for their own use, may
   apply for the construction of individual farmhouses or concentrated townhouses on
   their own agricultural land with the approval of the competent authorities at the city or
   county/municipality, provided that the construction does not affect agricultural
   production environment and the development of farm villages.”
136                                    《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


concentrated townhouses. The Hsin-Chu government denied the
application because the Council of Agriculture considered the land in
concern to be located in specific agricultural zones of the regional plan.
The farmers were dissatisfied with the decision and contested that the
executive order violated the principle of proportionality. They argued
that concentrated townhouse will boosts the economy by maintaining a
productive agricultural environment.

      One of the parties involved in the suit, namely, the Council of
Agricultural Affairs, attempted to justify its order by arguing that,

      “[T]he farms are declining off rapidly recently in Taiwan. As
      climate changes and the crisis of food shortage increase, farm
      protection is one priority of national policy. However, specific
      agricultural areas that have been regarded as high-quality
      agricultural land, often becomes the site of farmhouses due to
      its better location and public infrastructure, decreasing the
      quality and quantity of good agricultural lands and impacting
      the environment of agricultural productivity. In order to ensure
      food security, protect high-quality agricultural land, and create
      a sustainable agricultural environment, the applications for
      farmhouse construction should be more restricted. Food
      security has become an issue of national security and the
      government has determined to protect specific agricultural
      areas in order to ensure the quantity of high-quality agricultural
                                                                  61
      lands and maintain the capability of the food supply.”

      The court accepted the argument of the Council of Agriculture by


61 Taipei Gaodeng Xingzheng Fayuan [Taipei Admin. High Ct.] 100 Su No. 1349 (2011)
   (Taiwan).
An Unprincipled Principle?                                                      137


referring to the principle of proportionality. The court pointed out that,
the amount of farmland has declined rapidly and impacted the country’s
agricultural productivity. The administrative order made by the Council
of Agriculture is necessary to prevent good farmland from being
overused. Moreover, the court believed that the order could be used as
reference for other authorities in making decisions, which would help
maintain good farms for agricultural use and facilitate sustainable
agriculture development. The court then concluded that the order was
necessary to achieve the administrative purpose and satisfied the tests of
the proportionality principle. Strict adherence to the three tests of the
proportionality principle would indicate that the restriction of the use of
personal property for the purpose of furthering the nation’s agricultural
policy could hardly be necessary. On the one hand, the order failed to
limit the restriction on farmhouse beyond certain size or with specific
conditions; it may not justify the necessity of restriction. On the other
hand, whether the purpose of protecting farmland is proportional against
the rights of many farmland owners is an issue that needs to be clearly
examined. However, when the court took into consideration the
uncertainty of climate change and the risk of food shortages, the
principle of sustainable development led the court to make a
compromise in its standard of review.

     In some other cases the court adopted a strict standard of review
without explanation. In the Supreme Administrative Court 101 Pan No.
567 Judgment (最高行政法院101年度判字第567號判決, hereinafter
“Canal pollution case”), the court examined whether fining the plaintiff
                                                                          62
would be an appropriate means to achieve the pursued interest.                  The



62 Zuigao Xingzheng Fayuan [Sup. Admin. Ct.] 101 Pan No. 567 (2012) (Taiwan).
138                                  《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


case was about waste disposal. The appellant, the South Office of
National Property Administration, was fined because the escape canal of
a piece of national land was found to be dirty. The appellant claimed that,
although it is in charged with managing the property, the canal is subject
to the administration of Kaohsiung City Government. The appellant
suggested that the decision was neither appropriate nor effective and was
not the least restrictive measure preventing the entire 420-meter canal
from being polluted. The court accepted the argument, recognizing that
to ask the appellant to clean the said section of canal would not help the
pollution of the entire canal. It would be more effective if the Kaohsiung
City Government could manage the pollution of the canal as a whole.
The court thus concluded that the fine imposed by the Environmental
Protection Bureau of the Kaohsiung City Government was neither
                            63
appropriate nor necessary.       In this case, the court seemed to suggest
that a measure is appropriate and necessary only if it can completely
fulfill the pursued goal. This standard is obviously stricter than the
standard usually adopted by the court.

      Perhaps because of the different contexts and degrees of uncertainty,
court in Taiwan changes its standard of review when applying the
principle of proportionality in environmental cases. The fluctuation
indicates that the court might not apply a legal principle with consistent
standard. However, the court in Taiwan fails to elaborate on a more
convincing theory to justify its application.




63 Id.
An Unprincipled Principle?                                                       139



     4.2.2 Proportionate Consideration on Multiple Interests in
           EIA Procedure
     In cases involving Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), the
application of the proportionality principle by the court is distinctive in
two ways. First, the court introduces many more interests to the balance
even though some of them were not included in the original
understanding of the doctrine. Second, the court has begun to apply the
concept of proportionality to procedural matters.

     In environmental cases, especially cases regarding Environment
Impact Assessments (EIA), an emerging tendency is that the court
includes more interests when examining whether a measure is
proportional. Moreover, the court applies the principle of proportionality
and requires the EIA decision makers to consider all elements
proportionally.

     The abovementioned An-Kang Incineration Plant case is one
          64
example.       The court held that the decision to not carry out the second
stage EIA violated the principle of proportionality. The plaintiff claimed
that the construction of the incineration plant in An-Kang (安康),
Xindian may cause significant environmental impacts and an EIA should
be carried out according to the law. Nonetheless, the committee of
Environmental Impact Assessment decided that the project did not need
to complete a detailed second phrase EIA, because it would be
“inconvenient”. The plaintiff thus challenged the decision of the
authority for failing to comply with the law.

     Again, the court did not examine the purpose of the measure and


64 Zuigao Xingzheng Fayuan [Sup. Admin. Ct.] 100 Pan No. 1022 (2011) (Taiwan).
140                                        《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


the damage caused when applying the principle of proportionality. The
court states that the authority should consider various elements to
determine whether a project would significantly impact the environment
and decide whether to carry out a second stage EIA accordingly. The
court first suggests that, the decision of the EIA fails to fulfill the EIA’s
purpose to “prevent and eliminate the environmental impact caused by
constructions” and hence is not proper. The court further compared the
damages and the benefits of the decision, stating, “the decision infringes
the procedural and substantial rights of residents, as well as damaging
the constructors’ interests and public interests since it may invite
residents’ protestation and eventually result in delayed construction.”
The court thus believed that the damage outweighed the benefit,
concluding that the decision to not enter the second phrase of EIA
violated the principle of proportionality.

      The argument of the court seems to be odd from a legal perspective.
The principle of proportionality aims to restrain the abuse of government
power from overly infringing human rights. It is only the public interest
and the directly resulting right-infringement that matter. As Alexy puts,
“the Law of Balancing requires the increasing intensity of interference
with liberty to be matched by an increasing weight of reasons justifying
                   65
the interference.”

      If the court adheres to the original understanding strictly, it should
examine the purpose of an EIA and its direct infringement on private
rights. But the court did not mention the purpose of the EIA and the
environmental interest in its decision, nor did it take the residents’


65 ROBERT ALEXY, A THEORY OF CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS 231 (Julian Rivers trans.,
   Oxford University Press 2010) (2002).
An Unprincipled Principle?                                                       141


                                         66
interest as pursued public interests.         Instead, the court considered the
interests of the developer and the interests of the residents jointly, stating
that the damage of the EIA decision on the residents and the developer
was too much and hence not proportional. It seems that the court
regarded all private interests as the opposite of the public interests
pursued by a government agency.

     EIA was designed to include understated environmental costs in the
decision-making process of the government, preventing damage to the
environment. EIA provides information for the government in order to
balance environmental protection and other public interests such as
economic development. It is an internal decision for reference and
should not be examined under the logic of proportionality.

     The way the court applies the proportionality principle to EIA cases
in Taiwan can be explained from the aspect of late legal transplantation.
While Taiwan learned the EIA system from the U.S. and the German-
refined principle of proportionality, the court is required to adapt both
doctrines to the local context. It is possible that the court applies the
doctrine in EIA cases without careful consideration or out of insufficient
understanding of the principle due to a shorter history of use and more
recent transplantation. Yet, the distinctive design of EIA in Taiwan may
better explain why the court applies the principle in EIA cases. In
Taiwan, the EIA committee of the Environmental Protection Agency,
instead of the responsible government agency, examines EIAs. In
addition, the EIA decision has veto power for major development
projects. The whole project becomes illegal if the assessment does not
pass the EIA committee’s examination. However, if the EIA concludes


66 Zuigao Xingzheng Fayuan [Sup. Admin. Ct.] 100 Pan No. 1022 (2011) (Taiwan).
142                                《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


that a project passes its review, it permits the project and subsequent
environmental damages. Because EIA decisions directly impact the
environment and the rights of the developers and citizens, it is
understood as an exercise of public power that may threaten individuals’
rights and freedom.

      However, the “public interests” of EIA can be very different from
different points of view. From the developers’ point of view, if EIA
rejects a project, it is because the public interest in protecting the
environment outweighs the infringed rights of the developer. To
environmental groups, if EIA permits a project, the court should consider
both the interests of the development project and the impact on the
environment. For other persons of interest, such as involved residents, it
is the environmental interests and other rights of citizens that should be
balanced against the interests of the projects. In the Supreme
Administrative Court 100 Pan No. 1022 Judgment, the court examined
the impact of the EIA on both the residents and the developer but left the
environmental interest and the interest of the incineration plant
unmentioned.

      The case also exposes the problem of the principle of
proportionality in confronting complex and conflicting interests in the
EIA process. First, the balance of pursued government interests and the
threatened private rights is only one part of environmental cases. The
tension between economic growth and environmental protection as well
as the resulting struggle between the developer and other citizens
challenge the capability of the proportionality principle. Through
including various interests in the balance, the principle is not merely a
legal doctrine to restrain the government from power abuse but a
platform reflecting and comparing different interests and policy goals.
An Unprincipled Principle?                                             143


     In addition, the notice of multiple interests also contributes to
shifting the focus from substantive justice to procedural justice. As
discussed above, the Supreme Administrative Court 100 Pan No. 1022
Judgment suggests that the principle of proportionality requires EIA to
consider all relevant elements and weigh each properly according to its
               67
proportion.         If the EIA commission fails to consider a necessary
element, or places too much weight on certain elements, the decision
violates the principle of proportionality. Different from the original
requirement for substantive outcomes, the court requests a legitimate
decision to be made under proportional consideration of necessary
          68
elements.

     By doing so, the court transforms the function of the principle of
proportionality from restraining government power to facilitating better
decisions through proportional procedure.

4.3 Adapting to Environmental Cases in the EU
     Regarding environmental cases, the ECJ’s application of the
principle of proportionality is affected by not only the distinctive
features of environmental issues but also the politics and normative
structure of EU law. If the bounds of normative or executive power are
widely drawn, or if decision making requires difficult political choices or
complex assessments of social and economic factors to be made, the
court usually considers marginal review to be appropriate.

     Although the integration into the EU was initiated for economic
reasons, the protection of environmental interests is highly valued under


67 Id.
68 Id.
144                                   《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


the current regime. Article 2 of the Treaty Establishing the European
Community required the Community to promote a high level of
protection for the quality of the environment; while Article 174(2)
further emphasizes that the Community policy on the environment shall
aim for a high level of protection. In addition, Article 37 of the Charter
of Fundamental Rights of the European Union states that a high level of
environmental protection and the improvement of the quality of the
environment must be integrated into the policies of the Union and
ensured in accordance with the principle of sustainable development.
Under these provisions, a high level of environmental protection has
become an essential goal of the EU, and therefore all policies should
take the environment into consideration.

      In order to achieve the highest level of environment protection, the
EU endorses the precautionary principle. The interesting question is
whether the ECJ applies the principle of proportionality differently in
environmental cases considering that the EU considers environmental
protection as one of the highest goals of EU law. How does the
enactment of the precautionary principle affect the interpretation of the
principle of proportionality? How does the court adapt the principle of
proportionality to deal with uncertainty in environmental cases?

      4.3.1 Threading Proportionality with Environmental Values
      As a general principle of EU law, the court applies the principle of
proportionality to precautionary measures taken by member states. The
combination of the two principles serves as a more practical and
reasonable guide for future policy.

      First, the emphasis on environmental value and the enactment of
the precautionary principle incorporates environmental value into the
An Unprincipled Principle?                                                   145


value-neutral principle of proportionality, which may prevent the
marginalization of environmental value in policy-making. In order to
assess the proportionality of environmental protection measures, not
only economic costs but also environmental value should be weighted.
The Communication from the European Commission on the
precautionary principle points out that society may be ready to pay a
disproportionately high cost to protect prioritized values such as the
                                           69
environment and human health.                   In the case of Artegodan v.
Commission the court noted, “It followed that the precautionary
principle can be defined as a general principle of Community law,
requiring the competent authorities to take appropriate measures to
prevent specific risks to public health, safety and the environment, by
giving precedence to the requirements related to the protection of those
                                         70
interests over economic interests.”

     The proportional review on precautionary measures was combined
with the precautionary principle. In the Pfizer case, the plaintiff argued
the authorities should wait for scientific studies on the risk of the
virginiamycin before it imposed restrictions. The Court of First Instance,
in assessing the necessity of the regulation, stated that the regulation was
consistent with the precautionary principle “by reason of which a public
authority can be required to act even before any adverse acts have
                       71
become apparent.”           The court was also convinced that the use of
antibiotics is not “strictly necessary in animal husbandry and that there
are alternative methods of animal husbandry even if they can lead to



69 The precautionary principle: The Communication from the European Commission on
   the precautionary principle, COM(2000) 1 final of 2 at 19-20 (2000).
70 Case T-74/00, Artegodan GmbH v. Commission [2002], para. 184.
71 Case T-13/99, Pfizer [2002] ECR II-3305, para. 444.
146                                     《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


                                                             72
higher costs for farmers, and ultimately, consumers.”             Although the
court confirmed the proportionality principle as a general principle of
Community Law, it concluded that the regulation satisfied the necessity
test.

        The court recalled the explanation from an already well-settled case
from the European Court: “where there is uncertainty as to the existence
or extent of risks to human health, protective measures may be taken
without having to wait until the reality and seriousness of those risks
                              73
become fully apparent.”            Therefore, the court concluded that the
interpretation of the safeguard clause in light of the precautionary
principle is permitted for a certain relaxation of the above-enumerated
conditions. It may happen, according to the court, that in particular
circumstances it is impossible to carry out “as full a risk assessment as
possible” because of “the inadequate nature of available scientific
         74
data.”

        In the application of the principle of proportionality, the ECJ does
not evaluate whether the measure adopted was useful, suitable or
effective, but whether it was manifestly inappropriate. “Where the
community legislature is obliged to assess the future effects of rules to
be adopted and those effects cannot be accurately foreseen, its
assessment is open to criticism only if it appears manifestly incorrect in
the light of the information available to it at the time of the adoption of
                         75
the rules in question.”


72 Id. para. 456.
73 Id. para. 162.
74 Id.
75 See Case C-504/04, Agrarproduktion Staebelow GmbH [2006] ECR I-679, para. 38.
   See also Case 43/72, [1973] ECR 1055, para. 24.
An Unprincipled Principle?                                                         147


     Applying the principle of proportionality may also contribute to
reducing concerns over excessiveness and cost of precautionary
measures, making the principle more pragmatic and economically
efficient. Precautionary measures have often been criticized for not
                                     76
being economically efficient.             Under uncertainty, an environment-
oriented regime may take excessive measures to prevent any
environmental derogation. These measures may not only be unnecessary
and costly but also sometimes leading to unexpected risks. For example,
constructing a dam for a possible drought may interrupt the ecological
system and become a threat to the maintenance of land and water. The
proportionality principle pursues a “desirable” level of environmental
protection and requires that all measures “cannot be used to accomplish
                                                                              77
anything more or less than necessary to achieve such a level.”                     The
proportionality principle may not examine precautionary measures with
strict standards, yet it may help make precautionary measures more
pragmatic. The above-mentioned Communication from the European
Commission on the precautionary principle states that “measures based
on the precautionary principle must not be disproportionate to the
                                                                    78
desired level of protection and must not aim at zero risk.”              The court in
the Pfizer case echoes that precautionary measures should be based on
“the most reliable scientific evidence available and the most recent
                                                                             79
results of international research” when scientific data is available.


76 See Cass R. Sunstein, Precautions Against What? Perceptions, Heuristics and Culture,
   in THE REALITY OF PRECAUTION: COMPARING RISK REGULATION IN THE UNITED
   STATES AND EUROPE 492, 498-504 (Jonathan B. Wiener, Michael D. Rogers, James K.
   Hammitt & Peter H. Sand eds., 2010).
77 See Natalie McNelis, EU Communication on the Precautionary Principle, 3(3) J.
   INT’L ECO. L. 545, 547 (2000).
78 Commission Communication, supra note 69, at 4.
79 Id. See also Case T-70/99, Alpharma Inc v. Council [2002] ECR II-3495.
148                                     《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


      In the EU, the applications of two principles—the principle of
proportionality and the principle of precaution—interact with each other.
The emphasis of precautionary measures in situations of environmental
uncertainty facilitates the embodiment of environmental value in the
application of the principle of proportionality. By the same token, the
requirement of proportionality may also contribute to the reduction of
unnecessary and costly precautionary measures.

      4.3.2 A Narrow Version of Proportionality with an Uncertain
            Standard of Review
      The ECJ usually applies the principle rigorously and explains how
the three-step test is applied when reviewing administrative measures.
Theoretically, the three-step test of proportionality forms a package;
each step is equally important. In some other cases, the court indeed
strictly adopts the test and demands a demonstration of the costs and
                                80
benefits of the measure.             However, when measures and their
environmental impacts are highly uncertain, the court tends to bypass the
test of appropriateness and ignore the test of proportionality in the
                                                                         81
narrow sense, focusing most of its efforts on the test of necessity.          As a
result, in cases involving environmental issues, the test of necessity is
the core. However, the uncertainty of the meaning of “necessity” results
in an inconsistent standard of review in the ECJ’s judgments. Take the
judgments concerning biodiversity as an example. In the German
Crayfish case, which concerns the banning of commercial imports of all
species of live crayfish, the court found that the measure violated the



80 E.g., Jointed case C-369/96 and C-376/96 [1999] ECR I 8453, para. 78.
81 See PAUL CRAIG, EU ADMINISTRATIVE LAW 670 (2006). See also, Case C-28/05, G. J.
   Dokter and Others [2006] ECR I-05431, paras. 74-76.
An Unprincipled Principle?                                                149


necessity test. According to the court, a measure having discriminatory
effects can only be justified under the expressed public grounds
prescribed in Article 30 of the EC Treaty. The court applied the necessity
test and found that the German measure can be replaced by alternative
measures with less restrictive effects. As a result, the contested measure
                     82
is disproportionate.

     In another case involving biodiversity and the free movement of
goods, however, the court adopted a less strict standard of review. The
Bluhme case concerns a Danish ban on importing yellow bees to a small
island to protect against fauna falsification. The claimant argued the
                                                           83
measure violates the free trade interest of the EU.             The objective
recognized by the court is to maintain specific species of brown bees
inhabiting the island. The court found the objective justified and
suggested that only an outright import ban would be effective to
conserve the species. Thus, the court concludes that the Danish ban
satisfied the test of necessity.

     One commentator writes, “in practice, this would imply that the
court took a less coherent approach when applying the suitability and
necessity test, applying a strict test in cases where it believed that the
individual interests should prevail and a less strict approach when it
believed that public interest should prevail. Whether the third test is
                                                    84
applied or not depends on the desired outcome.”




82 Case C-131/93, Commission v. Germany [1994] ECR 3513.
83 Case C-67/97, Ditle v. Bluhme [1998] ECR I-08033.
84 Harbo, supra note 22, at 166.
150                                     《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）



      4.3.3 The Development of Procedural Proportionality
      Recently the EU applies the principle of proportionality in a
procedural fashion. In the case of Vodafone and Others, instead of
second-guessing the merits of the substantive choices made by the EU
legislator, ECJ required the EU legislator to show that it has taken all
                                                                   85
relevant interests into consideration when making a law.                Perhaps
because substantive evaluation of the means and goals is difficult in
cases involving environmental uncertainty, the ECJ has gradually
applied the principle of proportionality to procedural rights in
environmental cases. The Bluhme case involved prohibiting marketing
                                   86
beers that contain additives.           When the court looked into the
proportionality of the German regulation, it reviewed the procedural
reasonableness. The court concluded that if a person has no opportunity
to challenge administrative decision before the court, the decision cannot
be considered as satisfying the principle of proportionality. The court
pointed out that proportionality required an easily accessible and swift
                          87
authorization procedure.       In other words, the German regulation failed
the proportionality tests, not only because of the substantive rights it
may infringe, but also because it leaves no procedural opportunity for
traders to obtain authorization. It seems that, in the case of
environmental issues where uncertainty is high, the court shifts its focus
to procedural protection, which is analogous to the doctrine of due
                                        88
process of U.S. Constitutional Law.


85 See Case C-58/08, Vodafone and Others [2010] ECR I4999.
86 Case 178/84, Commission v. Germany [1987] ECR 1227.
87 Id.
88 Similar opinion, please see Sacha Prechal, Free Movement and Procedural
   Requirements: Proportionality   Reconsidered,   35(3)   LEGAL ISSUES   ECON.
   INTEGRATION 201, 214 (2008).
An Unprincipled Principle?                                               151


5. An Unprincipled Principle?

     The principle of proportionality is portrayed as a general principle
of administrative law that can be transplanted across boundaries and
should be accepted universally. Both in a new democracy like Taiwan or
in a supranational organization such as the EU, the principle of
proportionality is codified and widely applied. In Taiwan, scholars and
the Constitutional Court introduced the principle of proportionality in
order to restrain the arbitrary use of government power during the
process of democratization. The principle was then codified into the
Administrative Procedure Act of 2000, becoming the foundational
principle of administrative law. In the EU, however, the principle was
derived from legal traditions of European states and then adopted by the
law of the supranational organization. Despite the very different routes
of legal transplantation, the principle is surprisingly similar in the law of
the two jurisdictions. It is a legal tool to evaluate the costs and benefits
of an administrative measure, and it is structured with the famous three-
step test.

     Yet if we take closer look at how the principle is interpreted,
applied and adapted by courts, we arrive at a different understanding of
the universality of the principle.

     Through an analysis of the judgments of the European Court of
Justice and the Administrative court of Taiwan in environmental cases,
this article suggests that the principle is used differently according to the
context and the nature of cases.

     The first observation is a general one. In Taiwan, the principle is
frequently used in incorrect or incomplete ways. The court sometimes
152                                 《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）


mentions the principle without substantial application, sometimes
confuses it with other legal doctrines, and sometimes misinterprets
which interests should be evaluated. The short history of the principle’s
legal transplantation in Taiwan may well indicate that these problems
will eventually resolve when the legal community of Taiwan becomes
more mature. However, the experience of the EU suggests that even in a
jurisdiction with a solid tradition of using the principle, the principle is
strategically applied. The ECJ generally adheres to the original meaning
and provides more thorough reasons when it applies the principle.
However, the court strategically uses the principle to highlight the goal
of integration and to endorse measures taken by EU institutions.

      The second observation considers the differences inherent in
environmental cases. Due to features of uncertainty, multiple but
conflicting values, and the need for a future-oriented perspective,
environmental law has becomes a distinctive research field of
administrative law. The distinctiveness of environmental cases also
challenges the claim of universality of the proportionality principle. In
both Taiwan and the EU, courts do not consistently maintain the same
standard of scrutiny when reviewing environmental cases. Taiwanese
courts seem to be arbitrary, shifting between different standards of
scrutiny without a convincing basis for the shifts. The ECJ
asymmetrically favors the step of necessity among the three-step test,
which also results in an inconsistent standard of review.

      Furthermore, this article argues that the principle’s content and
formula are adopted contextually in both jurisdictions, but in somewhat
different ways. In Taiwan, the salience of Environmental Impact
Assessment cases and their unique form push the court to include
multiple interests when evaluating the proportionality of an EIA decision.
An Unprincipled Principle?                                                       153


The court also closely examines the decision-making process applied in
EIA and requires each element to be considered proportionally. In the
EU, where environmental protection is highly valued, the codification of
the principle of precaution “greens” the application of the proportionality
principle. In addition, the gradual emphasis on procedural justice has
also led to the development of procedural proportionality.

     The principle of proportionality, though widely claimed to be an
objective way to protect human rights, is as varied in its application as it
is widespread. The way the proportionality principle is applied by courts
covers a spectrum ranging from a very deferential approach to a quite
rigorous and thorough examination of the justification for a measure that
                         89
has been challenged.          The paths of legal transplantation and specific
social contexts lead to different strategies applied by the courts to
interpret the principle of proportionality. The distinctive nature of
environmental issues further exaggerates the arbitrariness. The
application of the proportionality principle is now largely determined by
the value and ideology of the court that applies it. Without proper
monitoring and balancing, the proportionality principle could become a
convenient excuse for courts to pursue their own agendas. In such
situation, a supposedly objective legal principle can come to justify a
breach of democratic accountability. It is worth noting that the
development of climate change has increased the uncertainty of
environmental issues to a high degree. Whether the court can deal with
increasing environmental uncertainty while maintaining its legitimacy in
applying the principle of proportionality is an issue we need to examine
closely.


89 G. de Búrca, The Principle of Proportionality and Its Application in EC Law, 13(1)
   YEARBOOK EUR. L. 105, 111 (1993).
154                                 《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）




                              Reference

Alexy, Robert. 2010 (2002). A Theory of Constitutional Rights,
      translated by Julian Rivers. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chang, Wen-Chen. 2015. Courts and Judicial Reform in Taiwan:
      Gradual     Transformations      Towards         the    Guardian    of
      Constitutionalism and Rule of Law. Pp. 143-182 in Asian Courts in
      Context, edited by Jiunn-Rong Yeh and Wen-Chen Chang.
      Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Chang, Wen-Chen, and Jiunn-Rong Yeh. 2008. The Use of Foreign
      Precedents by the Constitutional Court in Taiwan. Paper presented
      at The Conference on the Use of Foreign Precedents by
      Constitutional Judges, Interest Group of International Association
      of Constitutional Law. Nov. 14-15, 2008, London.
Cohen-Eliya, Moshe, and Iddo Porat. 2011. Proportionality and the
      Culture of Justification. American Journal of Comparative Law
      59:463-490.
Cohn, Margit. 2010. Legal Transplant Chronicles: The Evolution of
      Unreasonableness     and      Proportionality      Review    of    the
      Administration in the United Kingdom. American Journal of
      Comparative Law 58:583-629.
Craig, Paul. 1999. Unreasonableness and Proportionality in UK Law. Pp.
      85-106 in The Principle of Proportionality in the Laws of Europe,
      edited by Evelyn Ellis. Oxford: Hart Publishing.
─. 2006. EU Administrative Law. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
de Búrca, G. 1993. The Principle of Proportionality and Its Application
      in EC Law. Yearbook of European Law 13(1):105-150.
Duncan,     Robert    B.   1972.     Characteristics     of   Organizational
An Unprincipled Principle?                                          155


     Environments        and   Perceived   Environmental    Uncertainty.
     Administrative Science Quarterly 17(3):313-327.
Ginsburg, Tom. 2008. Constitutional Courts in East Asia: Understanding
     Variation. Journal of Comparative Law 3:80-99.
Harbo, Tor-Inge. 2010. The Function of the Proportionality Principle in
     EU Law. European Law Journal 16:158-185.
Hwang, Jau-Yuan. 2004. Judicial Standards of Review for Restrictions
     on Constitutional Rights: Comparative Analysis of the U.S.
     Categorized Multiple Tests Approach. National Taiwan University
     Law Journal 33(3):45-148.（黃昭元（2004），憲法權利限制的
     司法審查標準：美國類型化多元標準模式的比較分析，臺大法
     學論叢，33卷3期，頁45-148。）
─. 2013. Development of Standards of Review by the
     Constitutional Court from 1996 to 2011: Reception and
     Localization of the Proportionality Principle. National Taiwan
     University Law Journal 42(2):215-258.（黃昭元（2013），法官
     解釋審查標準之發展（1996-2011）：比例原則的繼受與在地
     化，臺大法學論叢，42卷2期，頁215-258。）
Iverson, Terrence, and Charles Perrings. 2012. Precaution and
     Proportionality in the Management of Global Environmental
     Change. Global Environmental Change 22:161-177.
Jackson, Vicki C. 2015. Constitutional Law in an Age of Proportionality.
     Yale Law Journal 124:3094-3196.
Kingsbury, Benedict. 2009. The Concept of ‘Law’ in Global Administrative
     Law. European Journal of International Law 20:23-57.
Kingsbury, Benedict, Nico Krisch, and Richard B. Stewart. 2005. The
     Emergence of Global Administrative Law. Law and Contemporary
     Problems 68:15-62.
Kuo, Ming-Sung. 2012. From Administrative Law to Administrative
156                                《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）



      Legitimation?. International and Comparative Law Quarterly
      61:855-879.
Ladeur, Karl Heinz, ed. 2002. The Europeanisation of Administrative
      Law:   Transforming    National      Decision-Making   Procedures.
      Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing Ltd.
Lee, Chien-Liang. 2011. Environmental Impact Assessment Review and
      the Principle of Proportionality: The Meaning and Concerns of the
      Supreme Administrative Court 100 Pan No. 1022 Judgment.
      Taiwan Law Journal 185:101-115.（李建良（2011），環境法實
      務專題講座（四）
             ：環評審查與比例原則—最高行政法院100
      年度判字第1022號判決的意義與隱憂，台灣法學雜誌，185
      期，頁101-115。）
McNelis, Natalie. 2000. EU Communication on the Precautionary
      Principle. Journal of International Economic Law 3:545-551.
Poole, Thomas. 2010. Proportionality in Perspective. Working Paper.
      London School of Economics and Political Science. Available at
      http://www.lse.ac.uk/collections/law/wps/WPS2010-16_Poole.pdf.
Prechal, Sacha. 2008. Free Movement and Procedural Requirements:
      Proportionality Reconsidered. Legal Issues of Economic Integration
      35(3):201-216.
Rivers, Julian. 2006. Proportionality and Variable Intensity of Review.
      Cambridge Law Journal 65:174-207.
Stone-Sweet, Alec, and Jud Mathews. 2009. Proportionality, Judicial Review
      and Global Constitutionalism. Pp. 173-214 in Reasonableness and
      Law, edited by Giorgio Bongiovanni, Giovanni Sartor, and Chiara
      Valentini. New York, NY: Springer Science & Business Media.
Stuntz, William. 1997. The Uneasy Relationship between Criminal
      Procedure and Criminal Justice. Yale Law Journal 107:1-76.
Sullivan, E. Thomas, and Richard S. Frase. 2009. Proportionality
An Unprincipled Principle?                                        157


     Principles in American Law: Controlling Excessive Government
     Actions. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Sunstein, Cass R. 2010. Precautions Against What? Perceptions,
     Heuristics and Culture. Pp. 492-517 in The Reality of Precaution:
     Comparing Risk Regulation in the United States and Europe, edited
     by Jonathan B. Wiener, Michael D. Rogers, James K. Hammitt, and
     Peter H. Sand. Oxford: Routledge.
Tsai, Tzung-Jen. 1999. Preliminary Research on the Principle of
     Proportionality of Public Law—Focus on German Law, National
     Chengchi University Law Review 62:75-103.（蔡宗珍（1999）
                                                       ，
     公法上之比例原則初論—以德國法的發展為中心，政大法學
     評論，62期，頁75-103。）
Thomas, Robert. 2000. Legitimate Expectations and Proportionality in
     Administrative Law. Oxford: Hart Publishing.
Tribe, Laurence. 1974. Ways Not to Think about Plastic Tree: New
     Foundations for Environmental Law. Yale Law Journal 83:1315-
     1348.
Tridmas, Takis. 1999. Proportionality in the European Community Law:
     Searching for the Appropriate Standard of Scrutiny. Pp. 65-84 in
     The Principle of Proportionality in the Laws of Europe, edited by
     Evelyn Ellis. Oxford: Hart Publishing.
Veines, Hannes. 2004. Determination of the Level of Environmental
     Protection and the Proportionality of Environmental Measures in
     Community Law. Juridica International IX:89-98.
Yeh, Jiunn-Rong. 2002. Constitutional Reform and Democratization in
     Taiwan: 1945-2000. Pp. 47-77 in Taiwan’s Modernization in Global
     Perspective, edited by Peter Chow. Westport, CT: Greenwood
     Publishing Group.
158              《中研院法學期刊》第19期（2016年9月）




         差別適用的普世原則？
      — 比例原則在歐盟與臺灣環境案件的比較研究

               林春元＊


               摘 要
  比例原則已經成為許多國家檢視行政行為合法性的重要判斷原
則。然而，被認為是客觀、普世的比例原則，是否因為不同社會脈
絡與法律架構、不同案件類型而調整其解釋與適用？

  本文檢視臺灣行政法院與歐洲法院關於環境爭議的判決，嘗試
分析臺灣與歐盟不同發展脈絡與環境案件之特殊性對比例原則客觀
性之衝擊。

  本文發現，比例原則會因為社會脈絡與案件性質而調整適用。
從社會脈絡而言，臺灣尚淺的繼受傳統導致法院經常誤解或誤用比
例原則；歐洲法院策略性適用以促成歐洲整合。從環境案件性質而
言，臺灣法院因不確定性而有寬狹不一的標準並納入對多元價值的
權衡；歐洲法院強調必要性、與預警原則妥協且發展出程序性比例
原則。

關鍵詞：比例原則、環境議題、不確定性、區域整合、民主化、預
    警原則。




＊ 中原大學法學院財經法律學系助理教授。
