    Comparative Administrative Law in Asia
Academia Sinica Law Journal                                                  221
Issue 21, pp. 221-259 (Sep. 2017)


                                                                              ＊
Participation in Thailand’s Rulemaking:
               Toward Policy-making Accountability

                                                           ＊＊
                   Khemthong Tonsakulrungruang


                                    Abstract
      The Thai government has often suffered from low public trust,
which is the outcome of its lack of accountability. This shortcoming has
resulted in an adversarial relationship between the government and its
citizens, as well as political instability. This article focuses on
administrative rulemaking. It argues that the current law is not sufficient
for creating accountable rulemaking. Government agencies promulgate
rules that are flawed by factual errors or unsound rationale and that
benefit one party over others. The article proposes that, in order to
improve policy-making accountability, Thailand needs to introduce a
better procedural safeguard that allows fairer and more meaningful
rulemaking. The experience of informal rulemaking based on the
American Administrative Procedure Act is examined, and suggestions
are made for its application to Thailand’s case.

KEYWORDS: rulemaking, Administrative Procedure                   Law,     public
          participation, Thai Administrative Law.


＊  Submission Date: November 5, 2014; Acceptance Date: December 14, 2016. [Line
   Editor: Yu-Wen Chang].
   With thanks to Professor Susan Rose-Ackerman for her encouragement, advice and
   support, Ms. Shuyan Li for revising the drafts of this paper, and Ms. Nicharee
   Phudpetchkeaw for research assistance on the Thai part.
＊＊ Lecturer, Faculty of Law, Chulalongkorn University.
   Online: http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/80804171.pdf.
222                                     《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）



                                    Contents

    1. Introduction
    2. Public Participation in Administrative Rulemaking in Thailand
       2.1 Rulemaking Procedure in Thailand
       2.2 Concerns on the Lack of Public Participation
    3. The U.S. Experience of Participatory Rulemaking
       3.1 The U.S. Administrative Procedure Act
       3.2 Costs and Benefits of Notice-and-comment
    4. From the U.S.A. to Thailand: Toward Better Policy-making
       Accountability
    5. Conclusion




1. Introduction

        Democracy is not defined only by a free and fair election. A ballot
box is no longer sufficient to justify an administration. A government
must complement its popular legitimacy with accountability in policy-
           1
making. When the government makes a decision regarding a policy
choice, either in the form of draft bills or executive rules, it must ensure
the public that it has paid due attention to their concerns prior to making
any decision, which must be reasonable and represent the whole polity.
In order to ensure the making of good policy, the government should
allow the public to participate in the decision-making process in various
forms. Especially in the case of newly democratized countries, where
governments need to work hard to gain trust from their citizens, public
participation is highly important in garnering support for the regime.

1    SUSAN ROSE-ACKERMAN, FROM ELECTIONS TO DEMOCRACY 2-7 (2005).
Participation in Thailand’s Rulemaking                                   223


     Thailand has embraced the idea of good governance, which requires
more public participation, since the adoption of the 1997 Constitution.
But public participation is not mandatory in the decision-making process.
The Thai Administrative Procedure Act B.E. 2539 (1996) (Thai APA)
allows affected parties to participate in administrative adjudication, but it
has left administrative rulemaking untouched. The incompleteness of
Thai laws have lead to concerns regarding the quality and legitimacy of
public policy. Thus, I propose that Thailand incorporate rulemaking
procedures into Thai administrative procedure law. Public participation,
which is the core of rulemaking procedures, can rectify these problems
because it creates a forum for both supporters and opponents of
regulations to voice their opinions. With a flow of information from both
sides, governmental agencies will be able to make more suitable
decisions, and can gain legitimacy by listening to the public’s voice and
providing the rationale behind their decisions.

     The focus of this paper is primarily on the notice-and-comment
process, which is well established in the United States Administrative
Procedure Act (U.S. APA) that is used as the model for the Thai APA
rulemaking procedure. However, public participation such as notice-and-
comment also imposes a heavy burden on the administration. Thailand
must design its own process to benefit from this mechanism while
minimizing costs.

     This paper begins with the problems in the policy-making process
in Thailand. The next part discusses the benefits and costs of the notice-
and-comment process of the U.S. APA, which is the origin of
administrative procedure laws around the globe. The paper concludes
with a comparison between the two jurisdictions and a recommendation
for Thailand.
224                                 《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）



2. Public Participation in Administrative Rulemaking
   in Thailand

       What is the current status of Thai laws concerning participatory
rulemaking? More importantly, will the current situation jeopardize the
country’s development? Although the idea of public participation has
become increasingly popular among civic society and lawyers, Thai laws
do not demand participation in all forms of governmental activity.
Deliberation in the form of administrative rule receives the least
attention. It is absent in the Thai APA, the major statute governing
administrative procedures, and other laws do not fully address it. This
absence inevitably puts the country in danger of political crisis.

2.1 Rulemaking Procedure in Thailand
       Thailand had undergone a major constitutional reform from 1992 to
1997 in order to engage the public in politics and secure
                  2
democratization. The lesser known administrative law reform also took
place around the same time. A series of statutes were promulgated to
improve transparency as well as accountability of the government: the
                                             3
Administrative Procedure Act (Thai APA), the Freedom of Information
       4                                    5
Act,       and the Government Tort Act.          The Administrative Court
Establishment and Procedure Act followed a few years later when the


2 ANDREW HARDING & PETER LEYLAND, THE CONSTITUTIONAL SYSTEM OF THAILAND:
  A CONTEXTUAL ANALYSIS 22-23 (2011).
3 พระราชบ ัญญ ัติวิธี ปฏิบ ัติราชการทางปกครอง พ.ศ.๒๕๓๙ [The Administrative
  Procedure Act B.E. 2539] (hereinafter Thai APA) (1996) (Thai.).
4 พระราชบ ัญญ ัติข ้อมูลข่าวสารของทางราชการ พ.ศ.๒๕๔๐ [The Freedom of
  Information Act B.E. 2540] (1997) (Thai.).
5 พระราชบ ัญญ ัติความรับผิดทางละเมิดของเจ ้าหน้าที่ พ.ศ. ๒๕๓๙ [The Government
  Tort Act B.E. 2539] (1996) (Thai.).
Participation in Thailand’s Rulemaking                                                 225


                                            6
1997 Constitution came into effect.

       The Thai APA was introduced to provide a procedural safeguard
when an agency exercises its power. The law lists basic rights for parties
                                                                                         7
likely to be affected by an agency’s adjudication: the right to be heard,
                                                     8                                   9
the right to a fair and unbiased hearing, the right to access evidence,
                                     10                                   11
the right to reason-giving,               and the right to appeal.             However,
Thailand’s       administrative       law       is   concerned     more        with    the
implementation of the rule in each particular case rather than
promulgating a rule with a general and abstract effect. Therefore, a
rulemaking procedure was not included in the Thai APA.

       The incompleteness of the Thai APA was due to the notion in Thai
administrative law that rules are government dispositions that do not
                                                                                  12
apply to a definite group of persons or circumstances.                                 An
administrative rule does not have a direct or adverse effect on an
                                                         13
individual’s rights, properties, or liberty.                  As a result, Thai APA
addresses only grant affected parties the right to fair process in
administrative adjudications while ignoring the participation of
stakeholders in the rulemaking process.



6    พระราชบ ัญญ ํติจัดต้ ังศาลปกครองและวิธี พิจารณาคดีปกครอง พ.ศ. ๒๕๔๒ [The
     Administrative Court Establishment and Procedure Act B.E. 2542] (1999) (Thai.).
7 Thai APA, §§ 12, 23-24.
8 Id. §§ 13-14.
9 Id. § 30.
10 Id. § 37.
11 Id. §§ 44-48.
12 Id. § 5 para. 4; see       ชัยว ัฒน์ วงศ์ว ัฒนศานต์ [CHAIWAT WONGWATTANASAN],
     กฎหมายวิธีปฏิบ ัติราชการทางปกครอง [ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE LAW] 163-64
     (1997) (Thai.).
13   ค ําสั่งศาลปกครองสูงสุ ดที่ ฝ. ๑๐/๒๕๔๙ [The Supreme Administrative Court Order
     No. F10/2549] (2006) (Thai.).
226                                  《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


      In general, most administrative rules can be promulgated through a
simple process, with the exception of royal decrees. Royal decrees
prescribes the time, place, and other important details regarding the
implementation of laws, as required by statutes, and therefore requires a
more elaborate procedure. A royal decree must be approved by the
                                                                    14
cabinet, and signed by the Crown before coming into effect.              Other
forms of rules can simply be issued by the head of the relevant agency. It
is fair to conclude that public participation in the administrative
rulemaking process is often overlooked.

      The absence of an “umbrella” statutory requirement for public
participation does not mean there is absolutely no public participation in
rulemaking. The lack of accountability has been inconsistent with the
                                              15
spirit of the larger constitutional system.        Hence, though imperfect,
there are a few substitutes to the Thai APA, yet they fail to provide Thai
administrative law with an exact and definite vision of a good
participatory rulemaking process.

      (a) Constitutions
      When procedural safeguards are absent from the administrative law,
the public can only turn to those prescribed in the Constitution. Since
1997, the Thai legal system has embraced the idea of accountable policy-
          16
making.        In the 1997 and the 2007 Constitutions, any governmental
activity with an adverse impact cannot be implemented unless


14 รัฐธรรมนูญแห่งราชอาณาจักรไทย พุทธศ ักราช ๒๕๕๐ [Thai Constitution B.E. 2550]
   (2007), § 187.
15 HARDING & LEYLAND, supra note 2, at 135-39.
16 Pasuk Phongpaichit, Democratization, Decentralization, and Environmental
   Governance in Thailand, in DEMOCRATIZATION, DECENTRALIZATION, AND
   ENVIRONMENTAL GOVERNANCE IN ASIA 104, 104-05 (Akihisa Mori ed., 2012).
Participation in Thailand’s Rulemaking                                           227


                                                                                   17
stakeholders have participated in the decision-making process.
Nonetheless, constitutional protection is limited. An activity refers almost
exclusively to physical projects such as the construction of a dam, a sea
port, or a power plant, but not rulemaking in an abstract sense. It focuses
mainly on the environmental aspect, and even in that case, not every
interested party is able to participate. Only the communities that are
located in the vicinity and are directly affected are able to exercise this
right.

       In 2004, the Office of the Prime Minister issued a regulation on
public hearing to comply with constitutional mandate: A project that has
adverse and direct impact on the environment and the health of the
public must undergo public hearing with prior notice and an actual
         18
forum.        But it still provides vast discretion to the relevant agency.
Usually, a prior notice contains scant and biased information, and
                                                     19
attendees are selected to favor the agency.               A group of conservationists
challenged the hearing procedure in one case in the Administrative Court,
but the court dismissed it based on legal technicality, ruling that the case
                                            20
was not ripe for judicial review.                 So far, there has been no court



17   รัฐธรรมนูญแห่งราชอาณาจักรไทย พุทธศ ักราช ๒๕๔๐ [Thai Constitution B.E. 2540]
     (1997), § 56; รัฐธรรมนูญแห่ งราชอาณาจ ักรไทย พุทธศ ักราช ๒๕๕๐ [Thai
     Constitution B.E. 2550] (2007), §§ 56, 67.
18   ระเบียบสํานักนายกรัฐมนตรี ว่าด้วยการรับฟังความคิดเห็นของประชาชน พ.ศ. ๒๕๔๘
   [The Office of the Prime Minister’s Regulation on Public Hearing B.E. 2548] (2005)
   (Thai.).
19 See the case of the Water Management Plan in Khemthong Tonsakulrungruang,
   Public Participation in Thailand’s Mega-Projects, presented at Law in Asia:
   Balancing Tradition & Modernization, the 11th Asian Law Institute Conference,
   Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, May 29, 2014.
20 ศาลปกครองสู งสุ ด ยกฟ้ อง จ ัดการน้ ํา ๓.๕ แสนล ้าน รบ. ยิ่งล ักษณ์ [The Supreme
   Administrative Court Dismissed the 3.5 Billion Water Management Plan], THAIRATH
   NEWSPAPER, Oct. 31, 2014 (Thai.).
228                                       《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


decision outlining a proper form of public participation.

       In other cases, the Administrative Court agreed that government
projects in question needed public participation. But these were mostly
tort cases. The Administrative Court focused on whether these projects
fell within constitutional requirements or whether the substance of the
attached feasibility studies were sufficiently convincing. In case where
agencies failed to properly involve the community in their impact
assessments, the court only demanded that these agencies pay
                                                                                       21
compensation, not that they conduct a proper participation process.
The Administrative Court defers to agency’s discretion on how to
conduct public participation.

       Another problem in Thailand is the chronic political crisis that ends
democratic constitutions prematurely. There is no guarantee that in such
an undemocratic atmosphere the upcoming constitution will provide a
guarantee of public participation and a positive outlook for living in a
good environment. The 2014 coup d’état abolished the 2007
Constitution, and with it, the protection it accorded. Despite heavy
lobbying attempts from non-governmental groups, the 2016 draft
                                                                             22
controversially removed the community’s right to be consulted.




21   ค ําวินิจฉัยศาลปกครองเชียงใหม่ที่ ๔๔-๔๙/๒๕๕๒ [The Chiang Mai Administrative
     Court        Decision        No.         44-49/2552]           (2009)        (Thai.),
     ค ําสั่งคุ ้มครองชั่วคราวศาลปกครองกลางที่ ๕๘๖/๒๕๕๒ [The Central Administrative
     Court Injunction No. 586/2552] (2009) (Thai.), ค ําวินิ จฉัยศาลปกครองพิษณุ โลกที่
     ๑๖๓/๒๕๕๕ [The Pitsanulok Administrative Court Decision No. 163/2555] (2012)
     (Thai.), and ค ําวินิ จฉัยศาลปกครองกลางที่ ๑๐๒๕/๒๕๕๖ [The Central
     Administrative Court Decision No. 1025/2556] (2013) (Thai.).
22 Paritta Wangkiat, Environmentalists Slam Draft Charter, BANGKOK POST (Feb. 18,
     2016, 5:46 AM), http://www.bangkokpost.com/news/politics/868180/environmentalists-
     slam-draft-charter.
Participation in Thailand’s Rulemaking                                                 229



       (b) Statutes
       Certain statutes may require additional procedures for rulemaking,
some of which may include public consultation. But such participation
can be incomplete or impractical. For example, before a new city plan
comes into effect, the draft must be placed at the administrator’s office
                                                                        23
or another public place for affected parties to review.                       An affected
party is eligible to make a complaint to the relevant agency within 90
                                                                                         24
days, asking for modification or cancellation of the draft plan.
However, this participation is rarely possible in practice. The notice
                                                                         25
regarding the new city plan is not always well announced.                     Few people
know about it. Even fewer are able to access it and make complaints.

       (c) Internal rules and practices
       At the operational level, administrative agencies usually consult
with some stakeholders before a decision is made. For the drafting of
legislative bills, the Council of State, the legal advisory body to the
cabinet, issues a legislative checklist that requires agencies to hold a
                                                                                         26
hearing with stakeholders before proposing the bill to the cabinet.
Although this checklist is an internal guideline, failure to comply with it
will result in the cabinet’s refusal to introduce the draft bill to the
Parliament.

23   พระราชบ ัญญ ํติผ ังเมือง พ.ศ. ๒๕๑๘ [The City Planning Act B.E. 2518] (1975), § 23
     (Thai.).
24 Id. § 24.
25 See an example of the latest change in city plan without public participation at Chularat
   Saengpassa & Pongphon Sarnsamak, New City Plan ‘Could Ravage’ the Verdant Bang
   Krachao, THE NATION (Apr. 8, 2014, 0:00 AM), http://www.nationmultimedia.com/
   news/national/aec/30231068.
26 คณะกรรมการปฏิรู ปกฎหมาย, คณะกรรมการกฤษฎีกา [Law Reform Committee, the
   Council of State], บทตรวจสอบ ๑๐ประการ [Legislation Checklist no. 10] (2004)
   (Thai.).
230                                        《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


       For administrative rules, the Royal Decree on Good Governance
B.E. 2546 requires that for tasks affecting the public, the responsible
agency shall (1) hold a public hearing or (2) brief the public on the
                                           27
benefits for the whole community.               The standard is far from stringent,
and an agency still retains the freedom to decide its public hearing
procedure. In practice, opinions are exchanged privately between the
agency and some chosen parties. A policy might even be initiated by
some powerful interest groups. Sometimes, if the draft rule is
controversial, opposing interest groups manage to pressure the agency
into creating a forum in which they can voice their concerns. Another
example of public participation is when the agency hires an expert to
prepare the draft rule. The agency would include in the terms and
conditions of the hiring contract that the expert must obtain comments
                                                                                28
from the affected party by either public hearing or questionnaires.

       Nonetheless, these hearings are far from meaningful for three
reasons. Firstly, they are often conducted in a closed manner. The forum
is not open to everyone interested in that regulation. The venue and date
are not announced to the public. Usually, the agency invites participants
whom they consider to be “major actors” in that area. The hearing is
held briefly. In this way, the agency can manipulate the outcome by



27 พระราชกฤษฎีกาบริ หารจัดการบ ้านเมืองที่ดี พ.ศ.๒๕๔๖ [The Royal Decree on Good
   Governance B.E. 2546] (2003), § 8(3) (Thai.).
28 For example, the Civil Service Commission hired King Prajadhipok’s Institute to
   study the feasibility of allowing civil servants to register as the union labor. In the
   contract, the Civil Service Commission required King Prajadhipok’s Institute to hold
   at least nine hearings covering every region of the country and send questionnaires to
   no less than 1,500 civil servants. See KING PRAJADHIPOK’S INSTITUTE,
     ร่ างพระราชกฤษฎีกาก ําหนดหล ักเกณฑ์                                   วิธี การ
     และเงื่อนไขในการรวมกลุ่มข ้าราชการพลเรื อนสาม ัญ พ.ศ. [PUBLIC SECTOR UNION]
     30-31 (2009) (Thai.).
Participation in Thailand’s Rulemaking                                  231


inviting only stakeholders who support the rule while ignoring others,
particularly the opponents. Even if a public hearing is held, since there is
no provision on the procedure, the manner of the hearing could be
informal and insufficient for creating a meaningful exchanges of ideas.
Details of a hearing are posted at the agency’s office or website, which
are rarely visited. Most importantly, the content of the draft is not
disclosed. Unable to review the draft regulation prior to the hearing, the
public is unable to make any concrete and meaningful comments. Weak
procedural safeguards affect not only the rulemaking process, but also
the substance of that rule.

     Secondly, communication through these hearings is often one-sided.
There is no guarantee that the agency will take any comment seriously.
Since there have been no court decisions concerning the substance of a
public hearing, the standard for a proper hearing is not clear. Must an
agency keep records of communications made with all stakeholders? Is
an explanation required if the agency acts contrary to the opinion of the
public? If so, how formal and detailed should that explanation be?
Currently, no explanation is required. The agency might be able to act
arbitrarily without recourse because it is not required to formally
acknowledge and respond to comments.

     Lastly and above all, such hearings are only voluntary. Agencies
have has discretion on whether and how to hold a hearing. Should an
agency decide that a hearing is too costly or unnecessary, or that it will
not consider the concerns of the public, it can opt not to hold a hearing.

2.2 Concerns on the Lack of Public Participation
     When there are no procedural safeguards on rulemaking, two
concerns arise. The first is bad regulation. The second is the legitimacy
232                                         《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


of such regulation.

       When an agency is able to choose participants in a hearing on a
proposed rule, there is a risk that it may listen only to supporters of the
rule while ignoring those who oppose it. The agency may not include
certain costs in the feasibility study. The agency may place too much
emphasis on the benefits and fail to take any downsides into
consideration. Overly optimistic, the agency may not correctly assess the
impact of the regulation. The rule may affect a much wider group of
people than originally expected. Furthermore, the rule may simply be
unreasonable if compliance is impractical for the affected parties. The
rule may favor a single powerful group that has had a chance to
communicate with the agency and might impose costs on others who are
less fortunate. Simply put, this kind of self-selection bias could result in
a bad regulation.

       Isolation from public pressure could lead the agency to promulgate
a rule that, in the eyes of the public, looks ridiculous. The Ministry of
Industry (MoI) once issued an MoI Regulation listing 13 plants as
category-1 controlled substances, which can only be possessed and used
                                       29
under the agency’s supervision.             These 13 plants are local herbs widely
used by local farmers as substitutes for more expensive and dangerous
                           30
chemical pesticides.            The regulation purportedly protected farmers



29   พระราชบ ัญญ ัติว ัตถุอ ันตราย [The Hazardous Substance Act B.E. 2535] (1992), § 18(1)
     (Thai.); จ้ ีเลิกประกาศ "สมุนไพร 13 ชนิ ด" เป็ น "ว ัตถุอ ันตราย" [Revoke the MoI
     Regulation], ประชาไท [PRACHATHAI ONLINE NEWSPAPER] (Feb. 12, 2009, 4:24 AM),
     http://prachatai.com/journal/2009/02/19980 (Thai.).
30 13    สมุนไพร หรื อใครกันแน่ที่เป็ น 'ว ัตถุอ ันตราย'? [Which Is More Hazardous?],
     FOUNDATION FOR THAI CONSUMERS (May 12, 2012, 12:49 PM), http://www.
     manager.co.th/Daily/ViewNews.aspx?NewsID=9520000019377 (Thai.).
Participation in Thailand’s Rulemaking                                          233


                              31
from unsafe products.              However, the MoI regulation would
                                                                       32
significantly increase the cost of organic pesticide business.              At first
glance, the MoI Regulation did not show favoritism toward any
particular group, as both large and small businesses appeared to face the
same restrictions. But most organic pesticide producers are small and
local. Thus, such regulation acted as a big hurdle for local businesses to
compete with large corporations. As a result, the listing and permission
system discouraged farmers from switching from more expensive
                                                         33
chemical pesticides to cheaper organic substances.            The regulation also
proved procedurally flawed. The agency hastily passed the regulation
prior to its planned hearing date because the incumbent of the Controlled
                                                               34
Substance Board was about to complete his term.                     The voluntary
hearing showed the lack of transparency since only certain stakeholders
were invited. After the MoI encountered heavy resistance, the
Department of Agriculture withdrew the regulation.

       If the listing of controlled substances demonstrated unreasonableness
and a problematic promulgation procedure, the delisting of the red-
whiskered bulbul showed an example of a rule that was prepared in
favor of a small group of people at the expense of the public.


31   พืชสมุนไพรอ ันตรายปะทุอารมณ์ "ไบโอไทย"จ้ ีใจกรมวิชาการเกษตร [Hot Debate
     over Dangerous Plants, NGO-MOI], MATICHON ONLINE NEWSPAPER (Feb. 21, 2009),
     https://www.matichon.co.th/matichon/view_news.php?newsid=01lif01210252&sectio
     nid=0132&day=2009-02-21 (Thai.).
32                       ่
     ค ําแถลงของเครื อขายภาคประชาชน
     และองค์กรสาธารณะประโยชน์เรี ยกร้องให้ยกเลิกค ําประกาศให้พืชอาหารและสมุนไพร
     13 ชนิ ดเป็ นว ัตถุอ ันตราย [Open Letter to the Prime Minister on Ministry of
     Industry’s Regulation on Hazardous Substance], ประชาไท [PRACHATHAI ONLINE
   NEWSPAPER] (Feb. 12, 2009, 4:24 AM), http://prachatai.com/journal/2009/02/19980
   (Thai.).
33 Id.
34 Which Is More Hazardous?, supra note 30.
234                                      《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


       The red-whiskered bulbul (Pycnonotus jocosus) is a popular
songbird protected under the Wildlife Protection Act, which prohibits
                                        35
any possession without a permit.             Despite legal protection, birds are
illegally but openly trapped and kept for singing competitions worth
                        36
several million baht.        The network of red-whiskered bulbul traders and
keepers finally convinced the Department of National Parks, Wildlife
and Plants Conservation (DNP) to remove the bird from the list of
protected species, thereby allowing free movement of the bird trade. The
network claimed that the breeding stock was then sufficient to supply the
          37
market.

       This attempt to remove the red-whiskered bulbul angered
conservationists, since the removal contradicted the fact that thousands
of illegal birds were still often confiscated from poachers, indicating that
                                                                                    38
the breeding stock was not sustainable and marketable as claimed.
Initially, the DNP had not invited opponents to the consultation. But
media pressure forced the DNP to do so. Opponents then had a chance to
                                                                        39
present the flipside of the delisting and voice their dismay.                The plan

35   พระราชบ ัญญ ัติสงวนและคุ ้มครองสัตว์ป่ า พ.ศ. ๒๕๓๕ [The Wildlife Protection Act
   B.E. 2535] (1992), § 18 (Thai.).
36 See  รังสฤษฎ์ กาญจนะวณิ ชย ์ [Rungsrit Kanjanavanit], กรงไม่ใช่บ ้าน [A Cage Is No
   Home], 159 SARAKADEE MAG. 120 (2011) (Thai.).
37 ประท ้วงกรมอุทยานฯปลดนกกรงหัวจุกออกจากบ ัญชีสัตว ์ป่ าคุ ้มครอง        [Call     for
   Delisting of the Bulbul], BANGKOK BUSINESS ONLINE NEWSPAPER (Feb. 4, 2010, 3:27
   PM), http://www.savebird.com/Forum/index.php?topic=992.0 (Thai.).
38 See Kanjanavanit, supra note 36; see also Bird Conservation Society of Thailand, the
   Checklist of Birds of Thailand (2012), http://www.phuketbirdwatching.com/wp-
   content/uploads/2012/02/Notes-on-Checklist_V29Jan.pdf.
39 โป่ งวิด (นามสมมติ) [Pong-Wid (pseudonym)], เสี ยงจากคนรักธรรมชาติ ขอ "ค ัดค ้าน"
   การปลดนกปรอดหัวโขน ออกจากสัตว์ป่ าคุ ้มครอง [Call from Nature Lovers], BLUE
   PLANET (May 12, 2012, 1:17 PM), http://www.pantip.com/cafe/blueplanet/topic/
   E8886696/E8886696.html (Thai.); ปริ ญญา ผดุงถิ่น [Parinya Padungtin],
   นกปรอดหัวโขนย ังต ้อง “คุ ้มครอง” [The Bulbul Still Needs Legal Protection], KAO
   SOD DAILY NEWSPAPER (May 13, 2012, 10:33 PM), http://seminarsweet.blogspot.
Participation in Thailand’s Rulemaking                                               235


was postponed indefinitely.

       Large corporations can also suffer from the lack of transparency.
The Ministry of Public Health introduced a larger warning on cigarette
                                                  40
packages to discourage young smokers.                  The new warning label would
occupy more than half of the package surface and the packaging must
                                  41
contain no advertisement.              Tobacco companies were concerned that the
new policy would affect their business without any scientific evidence of
its effectiveness, but the Ministry did not involve tobacco companies in
the drafting of the rule. Tobacco companies finally filed a complaint to
the Administrative court that the Ministry of Public Health’s plain
packaging regulation had not gone through consultation with key
stakeholders as mandated by the Royal Decree on Good Governance
                                             42
before the regulation came to effect.             So far, this was the only case that
challenged the legality of the rule-making process. But the
Administrative Court has not ruled on the case.

       The concern of bad regulation, one may argue, can be corrected by
having a few extra experts in that field in order to provide more well-
rounded opinions. But there is a second concern of legitimacy that even
the best body of experts cannot fix. Modern democracy requires both



     tw/2010/02/blog-post_21.html (Thai.).
40 Jonathan Liberman, From Australia to Thailand - Defending Tobacco Packaging
     Laws Against Multinational Tobacco Industry Lawsuits, MCCABE CENTRE (Mar. 27,
     2016, 10:30 AM), http://www.mccabecentre.org/blog/from-australia-to-thailand.html.
41   ประกาศกระทรวงสาธารณสุ ข                เรื่ อง         หล ักเกณฑ์           วิธี การ
     และเงื่อนไขการแสดงข ้อความเกี่ยวกับพิษภ ัยและอ ันตรายจากการบริ โภคผลิตภ ัณฑ์ยาสูบใ
     นฉลากของบุหรี่ ซิ กาแรตตามพระราชบ ัญญ ัติควบคุมผลิตภ ัณฑ์ยาสูบ พ.ศ. ๒๕๓๕
     (ฉบ ับที่ ๑๘) พ.ศ. ๒๕๕๘ [Ministry of Public Health Regulation on Warning Label of
     Cigarette Package No. 18, B.E. 2558] (2015) (Thai.).
42   ศาลปกครองกลาง คดีเลขที่ ๑๓๒๔/๒๕๕๖ [The Central Administrative Court Case
     1324/2556] (2013) (Thai.).
236                                      《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


representative and participatory democracy. Policy can no longer be
                                 43
made only by technocrats.             Rulemaking cannot be justified by
technocratic legitimacy. It is being replaced by democratic legitimacy,
which stems from public involvement. The deliberation process must be
transparent so that an agency can be held accountable for its actions.
Direct participation from the public helps the executive branch oversee
the agency.

      The lack of rulemaking procedure in Thai administrative law is
dangerous to the country. The increase in the government’s activities
means a corresponding rise in the number of rules and regulations,
especially since the cabinet often uses rules as a shortcut to passing bills.
The Prime Minister, exercising his general authority, issue rules instead
of going through other lengthier legislative processes. Sometimes the
legislators themselves avoid making hard decisions on controversial
issues by deferring them to the responsible agencies to issue regulations.
The increase in regulatory activities and the lack of procedural
safeguards for rulemaking leads to regulatory uncertainty. In the case of
the aforementioned MoI regulation, despite years of preparation, the
agency, not expecting resistance from the public, had to revoke the rule
shortly after its promulgation. It is also upsetting for the public to learn
that an agency is vulnerable to lobbying and may not properly and duly
perform its duty, as in the red-whiskered bulbul removal case. This could
lead to costly and laborious lawsuits, as in the case of the plain-
packaging policy. Such uncertainty and resentment creates distrust
among various interest groups and the government.



43 See Juli Ponce, Good Administration and Administrative Procedures, 12 IND. J.
   GLOBAL LEGAL STUD. 551, 558 (2005).
Participation in Thailand’s Rulemaking                                  237


     When there is no procedural constraint, challenging an
unreasonable and badly written rule is highly difficult. People have to
employ a political campaign approach rather than a legal one. But
political campaigns are more costly and the outcome is less predictable.
More importantly, political campaigns and legal challenges lead to
confrontations between the agency and civil society organizations.
Instead of cooperating and exchanging opinions which produce mutually
beneficial outcomes, they meet on an adversarial battlefield, trying to
                    44
defeat each other.

     If Thailand adopts rulemaking procedures, it would enhance the
quality of the regulations and increase the legitimacy of the government
as well as placate opponents to the rules. When an agency performs
badly, public trust fades. Ultimately, the dispirited public no longer sees
a democratic government as their only choice. The 2014 coup d’état is
the latest manifesto of Thailand’s failure to create a credible and reliable
administration.



3. The U.S. Experience of Participatory Rulemaking

     The Thai APA leaves a large gap in the area of rulemaking. This
gap has partly contributed to Thailand’s unstable political environment.
Thailand has struggled to consolidate its democracy for more than eighty
years. But the 2014 coup d’état showed that the country failed once
again. The coup was a symptom of public distrust in an elected


44 See                   KING             PRAJADHIPOK’S           INSTITUTE,
   การมีส่ วนร่ วมของประชาชนในกระบวนการนโยบายสาธารณะ [PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
   IN PUBLIC POLICY MAKING] 20-21 (2009) (Thai.).
238                                      《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


government. When the administration’s policy appears corrupt and
unresponsive, without tools for audit from the public, people blame the
                              45
institution of democracy.          Ironically, ousting elected politicians only
gives rise to unelected bureaucracy with ever fewer official avenues for
accountability. Thai bureaucrats are known for their reliance on claims
of technocratic expertise for legitimacy. If Thailand had increased its
policy-making accountability, the political crisis may have been avoided.

      Thailand’s economy has also passed the developmental stage. In the
social context, as citizens have become more aware of their rights and
liberties and are more politically active, the government needs pay more
attention to the call for accountability and transparency. By allowing the
public to participate in rulemaking, the government should be able to
promulgate better regulations that serve dimensions of development
other than the economic one. Regulations should take into consideration
the impact on the environment, social justice, and minorities’ rights. But
there has been no major change in Thai administrative law since the
enactment of Thai APA in 1997 and the establishment of the
administrative court in 1999. Thai APA addresses only adjudication
while leaving rulemaking under-regulated. Thailand has fallen behind its
East Asian neighbors in promoting democratic values.

      If Thailand is to rethink its APA, from which country should it learn
about participatory rulemaking?

      The U.S. APA is chosen for its simplicity and effectiveness.


45 For how the state and democracy need trust to operate and survive, see Susan Rose-
   Ackerman, Trust, Honesty, and Corruption: Reflection on the State-Building Process,
   42 EUR. J. SOC. 526, 541-42 (2001); JUAN J. LINZ & ALFRED C. STEPAN, PROBLEMS OF
   DEMOCRATIC TRANSITION AND CONSOLIDATION: SOUTHERN EUROPE, SOUTH AMERICA,
   AND POST-COMMUNIST EUROPE 3-5 (1996).
Participation in Thailand’s Rulemaking                                         239


According to Section 553 of the U.S. APA, the informal rulemaking
procedure is paper based and requires only three steps for notifying the
general public, receiving and responding to comments, and providing a
statement. These steps are easy to understand and implement. Yet it is
sufficient for creating meaningful dialogue between the state and
concerned citizens. Informal rulemaking has allowed public participation
in rulemaking at the greatest level. The law demonstrates the spirit of
democracy that allows voices of all citizens to be heard. Its forty years of
operation means that the effectiveness of the law has been thoroughly
tested.

     Moreover, in addition to the text, the U.S. APA comes with a large
volume of literature that helps supplement the implementation of the
participatory rulemaking idea. Judicial decisions have filled in gaps and
voids in the APA. Advantages and disadvantages of section 553 of APA
have been through countless discussions, providing a rich source of
scholarship, cases, and empirical studies. These debates on benefits and
criticisms could provide valuable lessons should Thailand wish to
consider more participation in its rulemaking.

     The success of the U.S. APA can be observed through its popularity.
Although the ideas of participation and accountability originated in the
U.S.A., they have been accepted by emerging democratic regimes
around the world. Three of Thailand’s East Asian neighbors, Taiwan,
Japan, and Korea, have all adopted variations of the APA rulemaking
                                                                46
model that allow greater input from the general public.              Like Thailand,
these three nations once had enjoyed vast administrative discretion in


46 Tom Ginsburg, Dismantling the “Developmental State”? Administrative Procedure
   Reform in Japan and Korea, 49 AM. J. COMP. L. 585, 586 (2001).
240                                      《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


their developmental stage of economic growth. The legislatures
delegated broad authority to the governments to intervene in the
           47
economy.        The administrations used informal administrative guidance
to maintain flexibility and to avoid extensive legal procedures, while the
                                                          48
courts refrained from rigorous judicial review.                But all have moved
beyond that point. Taiwan and South Korea, which have had economic
success similar to Thailand’s, adopted APA rulemaking long ago. Such
requirements have generated more legitimacy and public acceptance of
                    49
the governments.

3.1 The U.S. Administrative Procedure Act
      The Administrative Procedure Act (APA) is the most important
source of administrative procedure. The statute was a result of the rapid
growth of governmental agencies’ actions in the New Deal. Due to the
growing activities of agencies, Congress and the private bar tried to set a
standard in order to curtail perceived abuses of administrative power.
The two primary objectives of APA are “to subject all federal
administrators to a common set of minimum procedural standards” and
“to assure that those subject to regulation have an opportunity for court
review of agency compliance with substantive and procedural limits on
                      50
agency authority.”         However, not until the New Dealers were leaving
office in 1946 did both the Executive and the Legislative branches
                                51
decide to pass the statute.          One of the reasons might have been to


47 Id. at 585-86.
48 Id.
49 Jeeyang Rhee Baum, The Impact of Bureaucratic Openness on Public Trust in South
   Korea, 16 DEMOCRATIZATION 969, 991 (2009).
50 JERRY L. MASHAW ET AL., ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, THE AMERICAN PUBLIC LAW
   SYSTEM: CASES AND MATERIALS 151 (6th ed. 2009).
51 McNollgast, The Political Origins of the Administrative Procedure Act, 15 J.L. ECON.
Participation in Thailand’s Rulemaking                                           241


impose a constraint on the incoming Republicans not to abolish all the
                          52
New Dealers’ projects.

     APA establishes a uniform procedure for both rulemaking and
administrative adjudication. For rulemaking, APA provides both the
formal rulemaking procedure in sections 556 and 557 and the informal
rulemaking procedure in section 553. If not specified by the statute, an
agency could adopt either the formal or informal rulemaking
            53
procedure.        Formal rulemaking was similar to a court trial because it
required elaborate procedures. The agency published the proposed rule
and participants submitted written responses, followed by trial with
testimony, cross-examination, and rebuttal. It was a costly and
complicated procedure, therefore, formal rulemaking was later
             54
abandoned.        Meanwhile informal rulemaking has become a common
standard with its requirement of a simple notice-and-comment. The
Supreme Court held that rules that have legal effects must follow the
notice-and-comment requirement. To determine whether the rule has a
legal effect, absent that rule there would be no adequate legislative basis
                           55
for enforcement action.

     Section 553 requires the agency to publish a notice of the proposed
rulemaking in the Federal Register. A notice does not have to be a
complete text of the draft rule, but only has to contain either “the terms


   & ORG. 180, 189-95 (1999); Paul R. Verkuil, The Emerging Concept of Administrative
   Procedure, 78 COLUM. L. REV. 258, 276-78 (1978); Martin Shapiro, APA: Past,
   Present, Future, 72 VA. L. REV. 447, 452-54 (1986).
52 McNollgast, supra note 51, at 192.
53 Automotive Parts & Accessories Association v. Boyd, 407 F.2d 330, 335 (D.C. Cir.
   1968).
54 See MASHAW ET AL., supra note 50, at 507-12.
55 American Mining Congress v. Mine Safety & Health Administration, 995 F.2d 1106,
   1112 (D.C. Cir. 1993).
242                                      《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


or substances of the proposed rule” or “a description of the subjects and
                      56
issues involved.”          It shall also include the time period and manner in
which to file any comment. The agency, after publishing a notice, shall
provide interested parties with an opportunity to submit any written
              57
comments.          The agency must also review these comments. Once the
final rule is issued, the agency must incorporate in the rule a concise
                                                          58
general statement of the rule’s basis and purpose.

      In addition to section 553, court decisions impose additional
procedural requirements to informal rulemaking. Comments and
responses constitute a record which the agency uses to justify its
rulemaking decision. The agency must rely only on the record for the
basis and purpose of the rule, and the agency’s decision must not be
                                                        59
contrary to the evidence shown in the record.                Sound responses must
be given to the comments. If the final rule is considerably modified from
the originally proposed one, the agency must reopen the comment
        60
period.      If the agency fails to properly conduct notice-and-comment,
the court can invalidate the rule on the grounds of being arbitrary and
             61
capricious.        Procedural review of rulemaking also allows the court to
review the substance of that rule. Should the court consider the agency to
have failed to give adequate responses to the party’s questions, whether
on scientific, economic, or technological aspects, the court can strike


56 5 U.S.C. §553(b)(3) (2011).
57 5 U.S.C. §553(c) (2001).
58 Id.
59 The integrity of the decision was protected by the fact that it was supported by the
   record, at which most of the communications were kept. Sierra Club v. Costle, 657
   F.2d 298, 402 (D.C. Cir. 1981).
60 Nat’l Mining Ass’n v. Mine Safety & Health Admin., 116 F.3d 520, 531 (D.C. Cir.
   1997).
61 United States v. Nova Scotia Food Products Corp., 568 F.2d 240, 252 (2d Cir. 1977).
Participation in Thailand’s Rulemaking                                         243


down that rule. The agency would then be forced to gather more records
                                                         62
or provide sounder reasoning to support its rule.

3.2 Costs and Benefits of Notice-and-comment
     Notice-and-comment draws both support and criticism. Supporters
argue that public participation in rulemaking leads to better regulations
and greater legitimacy. But some people have become skeptical of this
claim. Notice-and-comment is being challenged for pro forma
participation and ossification of rulemaking. Discussion of its costs and
benefits always involves the following four themes.

     For the supporters of notice-and-comment, an agency is not always
an expert in what it regulates. Sometimes it has to deal with unfamiliar
territory. Comments will therefore alert the agency to what it still lacks,
                                           63
and bridge any knowledge gaps.                  Public participation opens the
channel for everyone to submit their comments, be it a mere concern, an
argument, or an alternative to the proposed rule. These comments
provide an agency with more information, allowing the agency to make
the decision under a broader perspective, thus resulting in more
                                                                                64
reasonable and well-balanced decision making and a better regulation.
The process would check any excessive influence of powerful interest
        65
groups.

     Public participation is also a great source of legitimacy for the


62 Jerry L. Mashaw & David L. Harfst, Regulation and Legal Culture: The Case of
   Motor Vehicle Safety, 4 YALE J. ON REG. 257, 276-83 (1987).
63 CORNELIUS M. KERWIN, RULEMAKING: HOW GOVERNMENT AGENCIES WRITE LAW
   AND MAKE POLICY 158 (2d ed. 1999).
64 Id.
65 Stephanie M. Stern, Cognitive Consistency: Theory Maintenance and Administrative
   Rulemaking, 63 U. PITT. L. REV. 589, 592 (2002).
244                                       《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


agency. Expert and congressional delegation have lost their appeal as
justifications for the agency’s decisions because politics often play a role
                               66
in the rulemaking process.          Allowing the public to participate in policy
deliberation increases procedural fairness. The legitimacy of a rule can
be perceived when the agency is seen to act reasonably. With notice-and-
                                                                                    67
comment, the agency is “informed by the value of the entire polity.”
This does not mean that the agency must surrender to the majority
opinion since the majority is not always correct. But the agency must
show adequate reasoning as to why its action contradicts or aligns with
                               68
the will of the public.             Furthermore, public participation brings
transparency into the administrative process. It ensures that the public
has an opportunity to detect arbitrariness by the agency and to hold the
agency accountable.

      Public participation is a two-way process of communication. Notice
of a proposed rule informs the public of that rule. At the same time, the
agency is able to obtain comments before making a final decision. The
public, knowing in advance of permissible and impermissible conducts,
can better comply with it, and in the case of potentially affected parties,
they can voice their opinions to support or object to the proposed rule to
              69
the agency.         These reactions help the agency foresee what it will
                                                  70
encounter when the rule is implemented.                With acceptance of the rule,
the agency can expect compliance. With resistance, the agency still has a


66 Peter L. Strauss, Speech: From Expertise to Politics: The Transformation of American
   Rulemaking, 31 WAKE FOREST L. REV. 745, 755-57, 773 (1996).
67 Jessica Mantel, Procedural Safeguards for Agency Guidance: A Source of Legitimacy
   for the Administrative State, 61 ADMIN. L. REV. 343, 361 (2009).
68 Id. at 361-62.
69 Richard J. Pierce, Jr., Seven Ways to Deossify Agency Rulemaking, 47 ADMIN. L. REV.
   59, 59 (1995).
70 KERWIN, supra note 63, at 159.
Participation in Thailand’s Rulemaking                                          245


chance to make a revision to avoid potential problems. It is much more
economical and efficient for the agency to resolve any conflicts
internally before they escalate into lawsuits.

     Although no one is absolutely against the idea of public
participation, the meaningfulness of notice-and-comment has been
questioned. The notice-and-comment requirement has been criticized for
                      71
being pro forma.           Critics doubt whether comments can actually
influence an agency’s decision. Can a comment bring about a substantial
                                         72
change in a proposed rule?                    The agency may regard public
participation only as a rubberstamp or an administrative hurdle. Public
participation then becomes a method for compiling records for judicial
review instead of meaningful exchanges of information between the
                           73
agency and the public.

     One factor that compromises public participation is how late it is
held in the rulemaking process. In order to prepare a draft rule, an
agency may have studied the subject for years. When the comment
                                                             74
period begins, the rule is already nearly finalized.              This is especially
true in cases in which the subject of the rules requires scientific
knowledge. The rule is based on special expertise beyond a simple
political process. For example, the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) in the U.S.A. studied ozone regulation for 14 years and produced


71 Dorit Rubinstein Reiss, Tailored Participation: Modernizing the APA Rulemaking
   Procedures, 12 N.Y.U. J. LEGIS. & PUB. POL’Y 321, 332-33, 335 (2009).
72 See Mariano-Florentino Cuéllar, Rethinking Regulatory Democracy, 57 ADMIN. L.
   REV. 411, 442, 457-59 (2005).
73 E. Donald Elliott, Re-Inventing Rulemaking, 41 DUKE L.J. 1490, 1492 (1992).
74 Reiss, supra note 71, at 334; Cary Coglianese et al., Transparency and Public
   Participation in the Federal Rulemaking Process: Recommendations for the New
   Administration, 77 GEO. WASH. L. REV. 924, 931 (2009).
246                                      《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


285 pages covering almost 200 studies before making a notice of the
                75
proposed rule.       By that time, it was difficult for anyone to make any
arguments against the EPA’s decision. Moreover, it is doubtful that
comments from individuals can counter those of powerful interest
groups when the latter have better channels to communicate with the
agency rather than through submission of comments.

      Public participation through notice-and-comment is also sometimes
accused of being too adversarial in nature. Different parties often take
                                                         76
extreme positions and do not listen to each other.            The agency is more
occupied with offering counterarguments than with seriously considering
comments. Part of this hostility stems from a fear that the rule would be
overturned by the judiciary. If the agency substantially changes the draft
rule after reviewing comments, the agency may be required to hold a
                                77
second round of hearings.            The agency becomes risk-averse and tries
to defend its original draft.

      In addition to meaningfulness, public participation raises concerns
about the ossification of rulemaking. “Hard look” judicial review
                                                              78
heightens the procedural demands in drafting a rule.               The agency does
not know in advance the standard of review by the court. Which issues
will the court consider important and worth responding to? Years of hard
work could be struck down by the court. With such uncertainty, the
                                                                        79
agency tries to justify its actions through lengthy notices                  and by


75 See Whitman v. American Trucking Association, Inc., 531 U.S. 457 (2001).
76 Jody Freeman, Collaborative Governance in the Administrative State, 45 UCLA L.
   REV. 1, 11-12 (1997).
77 MASHAW ET AL., supra note 50, at 151.
78 Pierce, supra note 69, at 65.
79 FDA’s notice of the rule regulating cigarettes and smokeless tobacco products ran
   over 450 pages.
Participation in Thailand’s Rulemaking                                               247


                                         80
addressing any issue submitted.               A general statement of basis and
purpose is no longer concise since the agency has to respond to every
single comment, all of which are deemed “significant.” The statement
                                              81
may grow to several hundred pages.                 As a result, it demands more time
and effort from the agency to promulgate a rule. Rulemaking becomes
                                                             82
more expensive, and fewer rules can be passed.                    Ossification obstructs
                                                      83
the agency from realizing its policy goal.                 For a rule that has already
been promulgated, it tends to be “frozen in place, immune to change that
                                                                   84
advances in scientific knowledge would warrant.”                        The agency does
not want to revisit it. The agency then avoids rulemaking and resorts to
other alternatives that are less transparent, such as adjudication, policy
                              85
guidance, or negotiation.

      Nonetheless, despite the above concern, empirically notice-and-
comment does not significantly impede rulemaking. Although it is true
that a rule governing sunscreen labeling took more than 33 years to
            86
complete,        and a final rule on the reduction of Salmonella in the egg
                                                            87
supply began in 1999 and was issued in 2010,                      each year, the number

80 Reiss, supra note 71, at 328.
81 The preamble of the rule in supra note 50 was 217 pages in the Federal Register.
82 OSHA, for example, has been able to issue regulations on only 24 toxic substances
   out of hundreds. Its attempt to issue one generic rule regulating most toxic substances
   was, however, struck down by a court, although it did support its proposed rule with
   several hundred pages of statement. See Pierce, supra note 69, at 61.
83 Thomas O. McGarity, Some Thoughts on “Deossifying” the Rulemaking Process, 41
   DUKE L.J. 1385, 1391 (1992).
84 CARNEGIE COMMISSION ON SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, AND GOVERNMENT, RISK AND THE
   ENVIRONMENT: IMPROVING REGULATORY DECISION MAKING 108 (1993).
85 See MASHAW ET AL., supra note 50, at 651-52.
86 Jason Webb Yackee & Susan Webb Yackee, Delay in Notice and Comment
   Rulemaking: Evidence of Systematic Regulatory Breakdown?, in REGULATORY
   BREAKDOWN: THE CRISIS OF CONFIDENCE IN U.S. REGULATION 163, 164 (Cary
   Coglianese ed., 2012).
87 Id.
248                                        《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


of rules and their volume grow. On a larger scale, more than half of
                                                                                         88
proposed rules take no more than 13 months before coming into effect.
Even “important” rules that require the Office of Management and
Budget’s review are promulgated at the same speed. In fact, half of these
                                                     89
important rules are finalized within a year.              The agency does not seem
to be significantly slowed down by the additional procedure. The
                                                            90
volume of rules has grown steadily since 1946.                   The government has
issued an average of about 4,000 new rules annually for the past couple
                91
of decades.          In 2006, pages in the Code of Federal Regulations grew
                                                   92
33 per cent larger than that in the 1980’s.             These numbers indicate that
extreme delay occurs only in individual cases and is in fact uncommon.
Systematically, notice-and-comment rulemaking is still doing fine.
Increased cost is still acceptable and does not exceed the benefit of
                93
rulemaking.          Delay is more about the nature of the rule rather than the
procedure. A controversial rule will always be delayed despite going
through a simpler process.

      More difficult is the assessment of meaningfulness and legitimacy.
                                                                                         94
A large portion of proposed rules may receive no comments at all,
                                                                         95
while a controversial one may receive over a million,                         significantly


88 Id. at 168.
89 Id. at 169.
90 Cary Coglianese, Rhetoric and Reality of Regulatory Reform, 25 YALE J. ON REG. 85,
   91 (2008).
91 Id.
92 Id.
93 Anne Joseph O’Connell, Political Cycles of Rulemaking: An Empirical Portrait of the
   Modern Administrative State, 94 VA. L. REV. 889, 964 (2008).
94 During the first half of 1991, forty per cent of rules published in the Federal Register
   received no comments at all, see Cuéllar, supra note 72, at 472-73.
95 Nina A. Mendelson, Agency Burrowing: Entrenching Policies and Personnel Before a
   New President Arrives, 78 N.Y.U. L. REV. 557, 623 (2003).
Participation in Thailand’s Rulemaking                                     249


ossifying the process of that particular rule. We cannot expect the same
amount of public attention on every rule. Participants who submit
comments are quite diverse. Comments come in various formats,
ranging from form letters as a part of a political campaign to
                                                                            96
sophisticated letters written by attorneys representing business groups.
Sometimes comments from laypeople outnumber those from organized
        97
groups,        but many of them are only form letters. The various forms of
comments and diverse background from which they come support the
notion that notice-and-comment does allow more groups of people to
participate in rulemaking. In some cases, though not often, agencies
                                                                      98
have changed the substance of the rules based on comments.                 The
literature review supports the claim of the meaningfulness and
democratic legitimacy of informal rulemaking. Yet, the tendency of
agencies to pay more attention to concerns from large corporations
          99
remains.        However, the overall benefits, such as procedural legitimacy,
probably outweigh most setbacks. Such benefits are even more apparent
in the case of Thailand, where the state suffers low democratic
legitimacy and needs more policy-making accountability.



4. From the U.S.A. to Thailand: Toward Better
   Policy-making Accountability

     Should Thailand incorporate rulemaking procedure into the Thai
APA? The answer is in the affirmative. The two recent Constitutions


96 Cuéllar, supra note 72, at 461.
97 Id. at 460, 467.
98 Id. at 463.
99 ROSE-ACKERMAN, supra note 1, at 225.
250                                       《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


recognize and expand the right of the public to participate in
governmental projects that are harmful to the environment and health of
the locals. This constitutional protection sets a promising but inadequate
beginning, since the constitution requires public participation only of
projects with environmental ramifications. But as a few selected cases
above have shown, the impact from the government’s regulatory power
goes beyond environmental concerns. It also touches on other aspects
such as business and agriculture.

       In the nearly two decades since the enactment of the Thai APA in
1997, Thai society has gained much experience in policy deliberation.
The Thai public has participated in both national and local legislation
                                                          100
and also in several other government activities.                If they are granted the
opportunity, they will be active in administrative rulemaking as well.
Although Thai civil society is still seen as being too weak to introduce
its policies to governmental agencies and its readiness to participate in
rulemaking is sometimes doubted, it has been successful in blocking
many governmental decisions that overlook its interests. Some
conventional groups such as labor unions may have become less
important both in size and role. But other groups, particularly local
environmental, energy, and farmers’ movements, are especially active.
Improvements in information technology allow them to join forces with
                                    101
networks across the country.              The local body protesting the power
plant project on the Eastern coast of Thailand can get support from
similar movements in the North and South. Even when they are ignored


100 See cases of civic movement in social and economic development in KING
      PRAJADHIPOK’S INSTITUTE, supra note 44, at 24-39.
101 See an example of the latest movement against the government’s project at Asina
      Pornwasin, Mae Wong Battle Goes Online, THE NATION (Sep. 24, 2013), http://
      www.nationmultimedia.com/politics/Mae-Wong-battle-goes-online-30215514.html.
Participation in Thailand’s Rulemaking                                                251


by mainstream media, these activists are able to draw attention from the
mass public using alternative channels and online communities, giving
                                                                           102
them more leverage to lobby for the public policy they want.

     As several Thai cases have shown earlier, the court always defers to
the agency’s discretion on how to design a participatory process, which
is often described by civic society as insincere and insufficient. As this
trend continues to grow, civic society cannot avoid running into conflicts
with the state, whose law does not allow for better channels for public
participation than adversarial protesting. The Thai government should
start thinking seriously about introducing more effective rulemaking
procedures into the Thai APA. A clearer statutory mandate that
formalizes public participation will provide a better guideline for both
the agency to follow and the judiciary to review the agency’s final
product.

     Yet notice-and-comment rulemaking is not without problems. It
will put more pressure on agencies. Without public insight, an agency
will suffer from low policy-making accountability. But if its policy is
constantly blocked by lengthy procedures, the agency would suffer from
poor performance. Thus, Thailand needs to find a balance, a meaningful
rulemaking procedure that helps governmental agencies reach accurate
and legitimate policy decisions without ossification.

     The American experience teaches us that the fear of ossification
may be exaggerated, but still, the APA rulemaking procedure can


102 On Facebook (www.facebook.com), there are groups that cover topics from a protest
    against a local project to the regional concern of Dawei Seaboard in Myanmar and
    Xayaburi Dam in Lao PDR. They are able to communicate directly to followers and
    friends about their activities and the latest progress of each project. Since then, the
    movement has grown constantly in size and numbers.
252                                 《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


significantly hinder important policies. Massive political campaigns and
rigorous judicial reviews are two main sources of delay. But the delay
may be more welcomed in Thailand. Thai agencies often enjoy greater
freedom in interpreting legislative mandate to promulgate rules than
their American counterparts because the prime minister always controls
the majority of the lower house. Legislative oversight is therefore lenient,
as the legislative branch tends to defer to the executive branch’s
delegation of policy-making power. Delay provides time for affected
parties to find new evidence, to promote political campaigns against an
agency’s decision, or to prepare for a lawsuit. In this case, blocking a
proposed rule may be considered a strategic success.

      However, no provision can demand that an agency be less defensive
or adversarial. Providing reasons can only make an agency appears to be
as neutral and rational as possible. Unfortunately, there is no legal
mechanism to guarantee that an agency will listen to or be convinced by
sound comments. Even the APA could not give a concrete solution to
this challenge. Creating real, meaningful participation may have more to
do with the attitude of an agency and the attentiveness of the public.
Each agency must view the public as a counterpart or a colleague, not a
foe. It must realize that participation can help prevent more costly
lawsuits, or worse, violent protests.



5. Conclusion

      Several questions are posed by the prospect of adopting a
participatory rulemaking procedure from a fully democratic country to
the one which is less so. How would agencies, civic society, and the
Participation in Thailand’s Rulemaking                               253


judiciary respond to the APA notice-and-comment? Because Thailand’s
democracy is intermittent, the cabinet is significantly weaker than the
American executive branch in controlling the administrative branch.
unelected Thai agencies enjoy great independence from elected
politicians, who suffer from high political instability. Agencies are
familiar with top-down policy-making, claiming expert status for
themselves so as to ignore civic society’s voice. Will the agencies
faithfully follow the new mandate to create a meaningful policy-making
process? Will the courts become more assertive in adopting rigorous
scrutiny of the rulemaking, similar to a hard-look judicial review in the
U.S.? Will civic society find a delay helpful in slowing down the
agencies’ arbitrariness? Despite all the doubts, notice-and-comment is
necessary for Thailand.

     The dichotomy between an abstract rule and individual adjudication
is no longer important. An abstract rule can affect the rights and
responsibilities of a person as much as individual adjudication can.
Therefore, public participation in rulemaking becomes the norm for a
good administration. Participatory rulemaking promotes an accountable,
rational, and democratic government, by making an agency listens to its
polity before making any policy decision and by ensuring that the
agency is able to justify it. Although Thailand promulgated its
administrative procedure law in 1997, it does not provide procedural
safeguards for administrative rulemaking. The importance of the APA-
style rulemaking is vital if Thailand wishes to improve its policy-making
accountability.

     Participatory rulemaking would fill the gap in Thai administrative
law as well as offer as an example of accountable rulemaking for other
emerging democracies in Southeast Asia. It would help refine and
254                              《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


supplement the existing hearing and consultation process in Thai
administrative law, and align it with the universal standard. Thailand
could then begin on the path toward a mature and consolidated
democracy.
Participation in Thailand’s Rulemaking                            255




                                  Reference

1. English

Baum, Jeeyang Rhee. 2009. The Impact of Bureaucratic Openness on
     Public Trust in South Korea. Democratization 16:969-997.
Carnegie Commission on Science, Technology, and Government. 1993.
     Risk and the Environment: Improving Regulatory Decision Making.
     New York, NY: Carnegie Corporation.
Coglianese, Cary. 2008. Rhetoric and Reality of Regulatory Reform.
     Yale Journal on Regulation 25:85-96.
Coglianese, Cary, Heathe Kilmartin, and Evan Mendelson. 2009.
     Transparency and Public Participation in the Federal Rulemaking
     Process: Recommendations for the New Administration. George
     Washington Law Review 77:924-972.
Cuéllar, Mariano-Florentino. 2005. Rethinking Regulatory Democracy.
     Administrative Law Review 57:411-499.
Elliott, E. Donald. 1992. Re-Inventing Rulemaking. Duke Law Journal
     41:1490-1496.
Freeman, Jody. 1997. Collaborative Governance in the Administrative
     State. UCLA Law Review 45:1-98.
Ginsburg, Tom. 2001. Dismantling the “Developmental State”?
     Administrative Procedure Reform in Japan and Korea. American
     Journal of Comparative Law 49:585-625.
Harding, Andrew, and Peter Leyland. 2011. The Constitutional System of
     Thailand: A Contextual Analysis. Oxford: Hart Publishing.
Kerwin, Cornelius M. 1999. Rulemaking: How Government Agencies
     Write Law and Make Policy. 2d ed. Washington, D.C.: CQ Press.
256                                    《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）



Linz, Juan J., and Alfred C. Stepan. 1996. Problems of Democratic
      Transition and Consolidation: Southern Europe, South America,
      and Post-Communist Europe. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins
      University Press.
Mantel, Jessica. 2009. Procedural Safeguards for Agency Guidance: A
      Source of Legitimacy for the Administrative State. Administrative
      Law Review 61:343-406.
Mashaw, Jerry L., and David L. Harfst. 1987. Regulation and Legal
      Culture: The Case of Motor Vehicle Safety. Yale Journal on
      Regulation 4:257-316.
Mashaw, Jerry L., Richard Merrill, and Peter Shane. 2009.
      Administrative Law, the American Public Law System: Cases and
      Materials. 6th ed. St. Paul, MN: West Academic Publishing.
McGarity, Thomas O. 1992. Some Thoughts on “Deossifying” the
      Rulemaking Process. Duke Law Journal 41:1385-1462.
McNollgast. 1999. The Political Origins of the Administrative Procedure
      Act. Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization 15:180-217.
Mendelson, Nina A. 2003. Agency Burrowing: Entrenching Policies and
      Personnel Before a New President Arrives. New York University
      Law Review 78:557-666.
O’Connell, Anne Joseph. 2008. Political Cycles of Rulemaking: An
      Empirical Portrait of the Modern Administrative State. Virginia
      Law Review 94:889-986.
Phongpaichit, Pasuk. 2012. Democratization, Decentralization, and
      Environmental       Governance    in   Thailand.   Pp.   104-128   in
      Democratization, Decentralization, and Environmental Governance
      in Asia, edited by Akihisa Mori. Kyoto: Kyoto University Press.
Pierce, Richard J., Jr. 1995. Seven Ways to Deossify Agency
      Rulemaking. Administrative Law Review 47:59-95.
Participation in Thailand’s Rulemaking                                     257


Ponce, Juli. 2005. Good Administration and Administrative Procedures.
     Indiana Journal of Global Legal Study 12:551-588.
Reiss, Dorit Rubinstein. 2009. Tailored Participation: Modernizing the
     APA Rulemaking Procedures. New York University Journal of
     Legislation and Public Policy 12:321-377.
Rose-Ackerman, Susan. 2001. Trust, Honesty, and Corruption:
     Reflection on the State-Building Process. European Journal of
     Sociology 42:526-570.
─. 2005. From Elections to Democracy. Cambridge: Cambridge
     University Press.
Shapiro, Martin. 1986. APA: Past, Present, Future. Virginia Law Review
     72:447-492.
Stern, Stephanie M. 2002. Cognitive Consistency: Theory Maintenance
     and Administrative Rulemaking. University of Pittsburgh Law
     Review 63:589-644.
Strauss, Peter L. 1996. Speech: From Expertise to Politics: The
     Transformation of American Rulemaking. Wake Forest Law Review
     31:745-777.
Tonsakulrungruang,        Khemthong.      2014.   Public   Participation    in
     Thailand’s      Mega-Projects.      Unpublished   manuscript.    Paper
     presented at Law in Asia: Balancing Tradition & Modernization,
     the 11th Asian Law Institute Conference, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia,
     May 29, 2014.
Verkuil, Paul R. 1978. The Emerging Concept of Administrative
     Procedure. Columbia Law Review 78:258-329.
Yackee, Jason Webb, and Susan Webb Yackee. 2012. Delay in Notice
     and Comment Rulemaking: Evidence of Systematic Regulatory
     Breakdown?. Pp. 163-179 in Regulatory Breakdown: The Crisis of
     Confidence in U.S. Regulation, edited by Cary Coglianese.
258                                《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）



      Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.

2. Thai

King               Prajadhipok’s             Institute.       2009.
      การมีส่ วนร่ วมของประชาชนในกระบวนการนโยบายสาธารณะ
      [Public Participation in Public Policy Making]. Bangkok: King
      Prajadhipok’s Institute.
─. 2009.            ร่ างพระราชกฤษฎีกาก ําหนดหล ักเกณฑ์     วิธีการ
      และเงื่อนไขในการรวมกลุ่มข้าราชการพลเรื อนสาม ัญ พ.ศ. [Public
      Sector Union]. Bangkok: King Prajadhipok’s Institute.
Wongwattanasan, Chaiwat. 1997. กฎหมายวิธี ปฏิบ ัติราชการทางปกครอง
      [Administrative Procedure Law]. Bangkok: Sue Panya.
Participation in Thailand’s Rulemaking             259




     泰國行政命令制定程序中的民眾參與
                         — 政策制定之課責

                    Khemthong Tonsakulrungruang∗


                                         摘要
  泰國政府民意支持度經常低落之原因乃在於其欠缺課責性。這
個缺陷導致政府與公民之間的敵對關係以及政局的不穩定。本文聚
焦於行政命令之制定，並主張現行法不足以制定具課責性的法規。
政府機關所頒布之法規因事實上的錯誤或不周備的理由，以至於偏
好特定政黨而有所缺陷。本文主張為了要增進政策的課責性，泰國
需要引入更妥善的程序保障以使行政命令的制定更公平與更具意
義。本文探討美國行政程序法中非正式行政命令的制定經驗，並提
出可供泰國採納的建議。

關鍵詞：命令制定、行政程序法、民眾參與、泰國行政法。




∗   泰國朱拉隆功大學（Chulalongkorn University）法學院講師。
