  Comparative Administrative Law in Asia
Academia Sinica Law Journal                                             155
Issue 21, pp. 155-219 (Sep. 2017)




        The Development of Judicial
       Independence and the Birth of
                                      ＊
     Administrative Review in Mongolia
                                                ＊＊
                            Enkhbaatar Chimid


                                    Abstract
     After the breakdown of the socialist system, former socialist
countries, including Mongolia, have begun the transition toward
democracy. Since judicial independence is one fundamental element of a
successful constitutional democracy, one of the main directions of the
development and consolidation of democratic government in these
countries is the establishment of an independent, fair and efficient
judicial system. However, these developments in the transitional
countries are virtually unknown.
     The aim of this article is twofold. First, it looks at the essential
elements of judicial independence and its applicability to the Mongolian
judiciary. The article traces historical background of the judicial system
in Mongolia. Then it addresses the three-phased judicial reform and its
results. The discussion proceeds to consider institutional safeguards
which were put in place to secure the independence of the Mongolian
courts. Many institutional factors which influence judicial independence,
such as institutional arrangements, terms of office, judicial remuneration,
court budgets, discipline of judges, and the appointment process, are
examined.

＊  Submission Date: November 5, 2014; Acceptance Date: March 22, 2017. [Line
   Editor: 鄧婉伶].
＊＊ Chair of the Legal Studies Department, National Academy of
   Governance, Mongolia.
   Online: http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/71802171.pdf.
156                                   《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）



     Secondly, it surveys the establishment of administrative courts,
which was set up for the first time in Mongolia during the course of
judicial reform as an important part of judicial network. It deals with the
characteristics of administrative courts from the perspectives of its
jurisdictional limits, its procedure and work load.
     This paper suggests that Mongolia’s judicial reform has been
successful, although certain problems in the judiciary still remain
unresolved.

KEYWORDS: judicial independence, judicial accountability, Mongolian
          Court, judicial reform in Mongolia, judicial review in
          Mongolia, the system of administrative courts.



                                  Contents

 I. The Development of the Mongolian Judiciary
      a. Historical Overview
      b. The Establishment of a New Court System
 II. Three-Phased Judicial Reform and its Impact on the Independence of the
      Mongolian Judiciary
      a. Constitutional and Legislative Development at the First Phase of Legal
         Reform
      b. Legislative Development at the Second Phase of the Judicial Reform
      c. The Current Phase of the Judicial Reform
 III. Some Aspects of Judicial Independence in Mongolia
      a. Selection
      b. Appointment
      c. Tenure
      d. Political Neutrality of Judges
      e. Discipline and Removal
      f. Internal Independence of the Judiciary
      g. Compensation
                                                                                   157



        h. Other Aspects of the Independence of Mongolian Judges
        i. Institutional Independence of the Mongolian Judiciary
        j. Financing of the Courts
    IV. Development of the Administrative Review in Mongolia
    V. Conclusion




        Mongolia has experienced a significant increase in judicial power
in the last 25 years after adoption of the new Constitution of Mongolia.
Much has been achieved in establishing judicial independence in the
country. A number of the main issues related to judicial independence
such as the appointment of judges, and their promotion, discipline,
tenure, and compensation, as well as the institutional independence of
the judiciary are now secured at the constitutional, as well as the
legislative level. Hence, the Mongolian judiciary has changed
considerably. This is why Mongolia’s judicial reform is considered by
many to have been quite successful, especially in comparison to other
                            1
countries in the region.

        In the course of judicial reform, Mongolia has established
administrative courts in order to protect its citizens against offensive
government actions. These courts have been created for the purpose of
upholding a democratic regime based on the rule of law. The importance
of these courts continues to increase as their judgments, concerning the


1    “Overall, Mongolia’s legal and judicial reforms resoundingly have been successful,
     although they have not been without problems.” Sebastian R. Astrada, Exporting the
     Rule of Law to Mongolia: Post-Socialist Legal and Judicial Reforms, 38 DENV. J.
     INT’L L. & POL’Y. 461, 504 (2010); see HEIKE GRAMCKOW & FRANCES ALLEN,
     JUSTICE SECTOR REFORM IN MONGOLIA: LOOKING BACK, LOOKING FORWARD (2011).
158                                  《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


protection of rights of citizens and the establishment of a limited
government, attract attention from the public. Ultimately, it has
contributed to the increased role of administrative judges.

      However, challenges, such as limited resources, increasing
caseloads, weak decision-making capacities of judges, and especially
public dissatisfaction with the independence and activities of the
judiciary, still exist. Also the legal provisions aimed to establish
independence of the Mongolian judiciary consistent with standards are
not adequately enforced.

      In order to move forward, we have to consider our past, assess our
current situation, and look at the future.

      This paper deals with the state of the Mongolian judiciary in
general, and administrative courts in particular. The purpose of the first
part is to survey the historical development of the Mongolian legal
system. It looks at the development of the Mongolian judiciary from a
historical perspective, and then concentrates on the state of the
Mongolian judiciary during the socialist period (1921-1990). Modern
democratic concepts such as the rule of law and separation of powers
were foreign to the socialist state and law. The Mongolian judiciary was
totally dependent on both politicians and governmental officials. Thus,
the negative impact of the totalitarian regime on the status of judges will
be analyzed. The second part provides a brief review of the pace and
outcome of the legal reform in post-socialist Mongolia. In the third part,
the aspects of judicial independence will be analyzed. Elements of
judicial independence such as tenure of judges, their selection,
appointment, and promotion, matters related to discipline and removal,
compensation and financing, and internal and institutional independence
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia              159


of the judiciary will be examined in turn. Lastly, in the fourth part, the
development of administrative courts in Mongolia will be explored.



I. The Development of the Mongolian Judiciary

a.    Historical Overview
     Оne of the main directions of the development and consolidation of
democratic government in the former socialist countries, including
Mongolia, is the establishment of a truly independent judiciary. The
experience of established democracies in general, and more particularly
the Western tradition of constitutionalism and the role it grants the
judiciary in particular, are of critical relevance for transitional countries
aiming to institutionalize the rule of law. The constitutional and
legislative solutions to the problem of judicial independence in Western
countries are of direct relevance to countries in transition; the
implementation of some of these solutions is instrumental to advancing
legal reforms in these countries. Judicial independence is one of the
fundamental principles of the modern concept of government due to the
unique position that the judiciary occupies in a free and democratic
society. It is an indispensable element of both the doctrines of the rule of
law and separation of powers, because the courts are the most forceful
mechanisms for the defence of constitutionalism and justice. The
independent judiciary sustains the rule of law by enforcing the
constitution, other laws, and democratic procedures. Accordingly, it
helps to support the supremacy of law by maintaining the submission of
the state before the laws.

     Every democratic society aims to protect individual rights and
160                                       《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


freedoms through an effective court system. Judges are charged with the
ultimate decision over the freedoms, rights, duties and property of
                               2
citizens and non-citizens. Therefore, the first and foremost aim of the
independent judiciary is to serve as the guarantor of individual rights and
freedoms. The fact that judicial independence is absolutely necessary for
the protection of human rights is a good reason for every country, and
especially for countries with a totalitarian past, to support judicial
independence by all possible means.

      However, it is not an easy task due to the fact that courts in these
countries are easily manipulated to serve the interests of the state. The
judiciaries of the newly emerging democracies are still burdened by
                                                                     3
institutional legacies, which are difficult to overcome. Therefore, in
order to give a proper understanding of the current stage of judicial
reform in Mongolia, some insight into the country’s legal history should
be presented.

      For the longest period of its history (from 1206 up to 1921)
                                                              4
Mongolia belonged to the religious law family. However, after the
Russian revolution of 1917 Mongolia became a satellite state of the
Soviet Union, and its legal system for almost 70 years was significantly


2 Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
  Offenders, Basic Principles on the Independence of the Judiciary, 60, U.N. DOC.
  A/CONF.121/22/Rev.1 (1985).
3 ADRIAN KARATNYCKY ET AL. EDS., NATIONS IN TRANSIT, 1997: CIVIL SOCIETY,
  DEMOCRACY AND MARKETS IN EAST CENTRAL EUROPE AND THE NEWLY INDEPENDENT
  STATES 321 (1997); M. V. Nemytina, Judicial Power in Russia: The Present and the
  Future 7-8 (July 4, 2001) (unpublished manuscript) (on file with the Law and Society
  Association, Hungary); Peter Solomon, Jr., Courts in Russia: Independence, Power,
  and Accountability 2-5 (May 4-5, 2001) (unpublished manuscript) (on file with the
  Central European University Law School Library).
4 It was a legal system which had no clear differentiation of the judiciary and consisted
  of the Khan’s decrees and customary and religious norms.
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia                           161


influenced by the Soviet legal system and laws. Thus, Mongolia was
brought into the sphere of the socialist legal family.

      The most specific feature of the socialist legal system was the
rejection of such democratic values as the concept of the rule of law,
                                          5
doctrine of separation of powers, and irremovability of judges on the
grounds of their incompatibility with the major postulates of the theory
of Marxism-Leninism. The Mongolian courts became simply a weapon
of class struggle, an instrument of suppression along with the
revolutionary tribunals.

      The principle of class justice constituted another specific feature of
the system. One of the major propositions of Marxism-Leninism was
that a “war of social classes” lies at the heart of any social, political or
other type of conflict in a modern society. Based on this proposition,
only two main opposing categories were recognized in Mongolian
society, namely arats, i.e., poor cattlemen, and members of the former
ruling class--such as the secular and religious lords. Therefore it was not
the dispensation of impartial justice but the protection of the regime that
was emphasized as the main task of the Mongolian courts. Needless to
say, such a view of the main function of the court completely
contradicted the traditional Western understanding of judicial function as
the main way for adjudicating disputes.

      However, there was one positive outcome for Mongolia in joining


5   The raison d'être for such deliberate denial of the doctrine of separation of powers by
    the theoreticians, the Party functionaries, and scholars alike is fairly obvious:
    historically the doctrine of separation of powers was developed by Montesquieu and
    Locke as a remedy against absolutism; therefore, the doctrine of separation of powers
    cannot be applied in a totalitarian state, where all the power is concentrated in the
    hands of a single Party and its leaders.
162                                       《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


the socialist legal family. In the socialist period, the adoption of Soviet
law provided an opportunity to comprehend and embrace modern
European legal culture. The explanation of this fact is as follows: Russia,
as well as Eastern European countries that embraced state socialism, had
                                                                6
previously been members of the civil law family. Accordingly, the
socialist legal family adopted many important features of Romano-
Germanic law. In the period between the years of 1924-1929, Mongolia
                              7                          8
adopted the Civil Code, the Criminal Code, the Code on Criminal
            9                                10
Procedure, and other codified laws . To some extent this legislation
reflected civil law philosophy, principles, and law structures, as well as
its methodology. Therefore, the original basis of Mongolian law is to be
                             11
found in continental law.

b.    The Establishment of a New Court System
      The new government established in Mongolia after the People’s
revolution of 1921 abolished all laws and institutions of the previous
regime, and began to build a new legal order from scratch. The over-


6  JOHN H. MERRYMAN & ROGELIO PÉREZ-PERDOMO, THE CIVIL LAW TRADITION 1-2
   (2007).
7 Иргэний хууль [The Civil Code], in 22 Засгийн газрын албаны сэтгүүл [THE
   OFFICIAL BULLETIN OF THE GOVERNMENT] 27-35 (1927) (Mong.).
8 Эрүүгийн хууль [The Criminal Code], in 1 Засгийн газрын албаны сэтгүүл [THE
   OFFICIAL BULLETIN OF THE GOVERNMENT] 44-62 (1926) (Mong.).
9 Эрүүгийн байцаан шийтгэх хууль [The Code on Criminal Procedure], in 13
   Засгийн газрын албаны сэтгүүл [THE OFFICIAL BULLETIN OF THE GOVERNMENT]
   34-65 (1926) (Mong.).
10 See, e.g., Бүгд Найрамдах Монгол Ард Улсын хүчээ үнэлэгчдийн хууль [The
   Labor Law of Mongolian People’s Republic], in 3 Монголын хууль тогтоомжийн
   түүхэн эмхтгэл [THE HISTORICAL DIGEST OF THE MONGOLIAN LAWS AND
   REGULATIONS] 254-262 (2010).
11 As some scholars pointed out, a socialist law system strongly resembles the civil law
   system, especially in terms of its structure. See JAMES T. MCHUGH, COMPARATIVE
   CONSTITUTIONAL TRADITIONS 66 (2002).
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia                   163


simplified court system in Mongolia was first established in 1926 by the
                               12
first Regulation on courts.         Some attempts were made to establish legal
guarantees that supported the independence of the judiciary. Such
                                                               13
guarantees were the election of all judges in Mongolia,             which meant
that only the electorate could hold judges accountable for their actions,
and the establishment of the institute of citizen’s representatives
(people’s assessors). Court decisions were to be made solely by the
judge and the citizens’ representatives, and the presence of an outsider
during court deliberations was strictly prohibited by law.

     This Regulation was followed by the 1934 Regulation on the
                          14                                  15
Courts and Procurators         and the 1949 Law on Courts.         At first glance,
the governmental Regulations on the Court of 1926 and 1934, as well as
the Law on Courts of 1949, may seem to have many democratic features.
These legal documents created institutions of citizens’ representatives in
the courts, set up the election method for selecting judges, and increased
judge’s responsibility and accountability with the possibility of them
                  16
being recalled.        On the other hand, it is necessary to look at the


12 1926 оны БНМАУ-ын аливаа шүүн таслах газруудыг байгуулах тухай дүрэм
   [The 1926 Regulation on Courts of the Mongolian People’s Republic], in 1 Үндсэн
   хууль, түүнд холбогдох хууль тогтоомжийн эмхтгэл [THE CONSTITUTION AND
   OTHER RELEVANT ACTS OF THE MONGOLIAN PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC] 203-206 (1972)
   (Mong.).
13 Id. at 204.
14 1934 оны Шүүн таслах ба прокуроруудын газруудын дагаж явах дүрэм [The
   1934 Regulation on Courts and Procurators], in 1 Үндсэн хууль, түүнд холбогдох
   хууль тогтоомжийн эмхтгэл [THE CONSTITUTION AND OTHER RELEVANT ACTS OF
   THE MONGOLIAN PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC] 319-328 (1972) (Mong.).
15 1949 оны БНМАУ-ын шүүхийн зохион байгуулалтын тухай хууль [The 1949
   Law on Courts of the Mongolian People’s Republic], in 2 Үндсэн хууль, түүнд
   холбогдох хууль тогтоомжийн эмхтгэл [THE CONSTITUTION AND OTHER RELEVANT
   ACTS OF THE MONGOLIAN PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC] 89-97 (1974).
16 Id. at 91.
164                                       《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


administration of justice in Mongolia, as well as in other socialist
countries, with extreme caution.

      It goes without saying that the judiciary as a whole should be
perceived by the general public as an independent and impartial
institution in order to boost the confidence of the public in the
administration of justice. Such confidence and high esteem of the public
for the judiciary is very important because the authority of the courts
depends on public acceptance of judicial decisions. This acceptance, in
turn, depends upon public confidence in judges as truly independent and
impartial officials. However, for most of the socialist period, Mongolian
courts were weak and dependent bodies that lacked publicrespect, and
the career of judges had low status and few rewards. The status of the
judiciary was, and remains, low due to the role they play in the legal
         17
process.      Unlike a common law judge who uses reasoning based on
many specific legal rules stemming from the legislature, bureaucracy,
                              18
precedent, and the courts,         civil law judges interpret and apply codified
legal norms, without reliance on broader legal principles or precedent; in
other words, the characteristic element of the continental system of law
is its strict binding to the letter of the law. Their task is simply to
understand what it means and to apply it to the case at hand. Therefore,
judges are considered to be the “mouths of the law”, as defined by
Montesquieu. They use different forms of reasoning, which moves from
the more general to the specific, or, to put it more clearly, from a legal


17 MCHUGH, supra note 11, at 19.
18 It may be said that the facts in the case guide a common law judge to conclude which
   specific rules apply. They are professionally trained to consider every argument,
   however curious, and to balance different arguments against each other. Normally
   they will give reasons for their decisions, thereby enabling others to reconstruct the
   court’s line of thought.
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia                    165


rule provided by the legislature to the facts in the case under
consideration in order to deduce a conclusion. Thus, they rather apply
                                              19
rules created and formulated by others.            Therefore, they have little
opportunity to exercise interpretive discretion. On the contrary, common
law judges have broader discretion to interpret legislation.

     Also, actual political practice contributed to the low status of judges.
Such extra-judicial organs as special revolutionary tribunals were
established with the view of eliminating the so-called “enemies of the
people” from public life. Although these tribunals were subject to some
rules of procedure, their usual method of crushing the “enemies of the
people” was summary judgments and executions.

     But more than that, there was a huge gap between the political
reality and nicely formulated rules of formal procedure. For example, the
                                                                 20
Constitution of the Mongolian People’s Republic (1940)                states that
                                                                                21
“Judges    shall    be    independent     and      subordinate   to    law.”
Notwithstanding this formal recognition of judicial independence, judges
in the Mongolian People’s Republic were not independent. Members of
the Mongolian government or the functionaries of the Mongolian
People’s Revolutionary Party regularly interfered with judicial
deliberations in individual cases, instructing the judges to reach
particular decisions. Further, the meaning and application of such
concepts as “democracy”, “election”, “irremovability of judges”, and so
forth, were completely different in the Mongolian legal system

19 MERRYMAN & PÉREZ-PERDOMO, supra note 6, at 110.
20 Бүгд Найрамдах Монгол Ард Улсын Үндсэн хууль [CONSTITUTION OF THE
   MONGOLIAN PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC], in 1 Үндсэн хууль, түүнд холбогдох хууль
   тогтоомжийн эмхтгэл [THE CONSTITUTION AND OTHER RELEVANT ACTS OF THE
   MONGOLIAN PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC] 356-375 (1972).
21 Id. at 368.
166                                  《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


compared to that in the Western understanding of these concepts.
Therefore, it is misleading to rely only on the text of legal regulations
and laws dealing with the administration of justice.

      In order to prove this point, it is enough to analyze the real status of
Mongolian judges.

      First, let’s take a closer look at the election of Mongolian judges.
The choice of election of judges over appointment was justified in the
following ways: appointment of a judge would greatly reduce society’s
role in law enforcement, while on the contrary, election of a judge meant
that the electorate could exercise efficient control over the judges, and
the latter would be responsible to the general public. Therefore, judges
were accountable by law to their electorate and were expected to report
periodically on their activities.

      Although corresponding laws provided for the registration of all
candidates for election to judicial office after their nomination, however
only one candidate’s name would appear on the ballot, leaving voters
with no choice but to vote for the candidate imposed on them or reject
him or her by crossing the name out. Such “election” without any
alternative was fully in contradiction with the standard democratic
election procedure, and an explanation that socialist society is welded by
moral and political unity, that it has no competitive political forces, and
that a choice between several candidates was not necessary, was usually
offered. Thus, it was not the electorate but representatives of the
nominating organizations who made the final selection.

      Secondly, there were simple requirements for the position of a
judge. According to the 1926 Regulation, in order to become a judge,
one had to have the right to vote for or be elected to the local Hurals
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia                       167


(local people’s councils), and have a two-year record of responsible
political work. Being educated or experienced in the field of law was not
             22
required.         Instead of possessing qualities of competence, integrity, and
impartiality, it was enough for the nominee to be politically reliable in
                                                 23
order to qualify for the position of a judge.

     Active participation of two lay assessors (the so-called citizens’
representatives) representing ordinary people in deciding cases coming
before the court was expected. They usually did not possess legal
knowledge; in deciding cases they were guided by their so-called
“revolutionary legal consciousness”. The introduction of the institution
of citizens’ representatives was considered to be an additional means of
controlling the judge.

     Thirdly, the tenure of Mongolian judges was rather short. The
judges of the provincial courts were to be elected for only one year’s
                                           24
term (art. 8 of the 1926 Regulation). The Regulation on the courts and
procurators of 1934 added the requirement for the local governments to
get permission from the Ministry of Justice before nominating someone
                                                                       25
to the position of a judge (art. 8 of the 1934 Regulation).                 The first
Law on Courts adopted in 1949 raised the term of office to three years
                                                                             26
for lower judges, and to four years for the Supreme Court judges.

     The next problem was the way judges were held responsible.
Mongolian judges were exposed to various kinds of accountability. The


22 The 1926 Regulation on Courts of the Mongolian People’s Republic, supra note 12,
   art. 7.
23 Id.
24 Id.
25 The 1934 Regulation on Courts and Procurators, supra note 14, at 320.
26 The 1949 Law on Courts of the Mongolian People’s Republic, supra note 15, at 92-93.
168                                       《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


only difference in status between the court and the administrative
agencies was that the courts followed a certain procedure and that they
were empowered to impose coercive measures. Therefore, it was not a
big problem to remove judges from the bench. First, there was always
the possibility of resorting to repressive measures imposed by the
security agencies of the state. Second, the judge could be recalled in the
                                                                         27
same manner in which he had been appointed or elected.                        Recall of
judges was considered to be an important guarantee of judicial
independence because they could lose their positions only by the will of
their electorate or by a court decision or sentence already in force. Both
judges and citizens’ representatives were subject to recall by the Hurals
which appointed them. However, it should be noted that the recall
proceedings usually were initiated by the Ministry of Justice, thus
placing judges in the hands of the executive. Besides the possibility of
recall, there were provisions about dismissal from office by a court's
decision or as an outcome of disciplinary proceedings.

      On the other hand, as mentioned previously, Mongolian judges
were under undue influence and pressure from all directions: the
functionaries of the Mongolian Peoples’ Revolutionary Party, the state
bureaucracy, judicial officials and the administrative organs. As a result,
every condition designed to insulate the judiciary from outside influence
               28
was rejected.

      For the most part, during the socialist period of Mongolian history,

27 It should be noted that recall procedure is different from the impeachment procedure
   under the American Constitution. Recall is a simple dismissal from office by a vote of
   an electoral body.
28 See Н. Лүндэндорж [LUNDENDORJ, N.], Төр, эрх зүйн сэтгэлгээний хөгжил ба чиг
   хандлага [DEVELOPMENT OF STATE AND LEGAL THOUGHTS AND ITS TENDENCIES] 15-
   16 (2003).
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia                              169


the ruling Mongolian People’s Revolutionary Party deeply penetrated
every cell of Mongolian society. The judiciary was far from an exception.
On the contrary, a person had to be a member of the ruling party in order
to be even considered a worthy candidate for many hundreds of
positions, including every judicial position. Only judges who obediently
and unquestioningly followed the party line were able to get promotion
to higher positions, with all privileges attached.

      Understandably, party membership not only brought privileges and
career growth, but it also required a judge to be bound by strict party
discipline. In practice, it meant that judges had to follow the directives of
the Mongolian People’s Revolutionary Party instead of implementing
                                                                   29
the law. That is why the notorious “telephone rule”                     exercised by the
party functionaries at various levels proved to be such a reliable method
of influencing judges.

      In addition, the decision making of the courts was supervised by
other branches of the government. The legislative branch was quite
                                                                               30
active in this regard. The Constitution of Mongolia (1960)                          provided
that the Supreme Court of the Mongolian People’s Republic “is
accountable to the Great People’s Hural of the Mongolian People’s
                                                                          31
Republic and to its Presidium” (art. 66 of the Constitution).

      Also the judiciary was considered to be an attachment to the
executive branch of government. Since the Mongolian court was a state
institution, its activity was part of state activity. The judge was a state


29 The “telephone rule” meant that it was enough for the party functionaries or local
   bosses to give a call to a judge to get a desirable decision.
30 The 1949 Law on Courts of the Mongolian People’s Republic, supra note 15, at 306-
   320.
31 Id. at 317.
170                                     《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


servant and as such, was bound to follow the state policy. For the
Mongolian judge, the directives and instructions from governmental
organs were of the same importance as the evidence and the mitigating
and aggravating circumstances in every individual case. Indeed, the
executive organs exercising administration of justice were the most
active in influencing judicial work. For instance, the Ministry of Justice
was empowered by law to “issue orders and instructions concerning the
                                                      32
organization and bettering of courts work”,                which is an obvious
example of governmental influence on judicial activity.

      Furthermore, as with other socialist countries, the Mongolian
procurator played a much greater role than simply prosecuting criminal
cases. The influence of the procurators on judges was twofold. The
procurator performed general supervision over all the institutions of
government to make sure they were conforming to legal requirements.
                                                                                 33
According to the first Regulation on the Procurator’s Office of 1930
                                                                           34
(and all subsequent acts including the Law on Procuracy of 1976 ), the
Procurator General exercises “supreme supervisory power to ensure the
strict observance of the law by all ministries and institutions




32 Бүгд Найрамдах Монгол Ард Улсын Шүүх яамны дүрэм [The Regulation on the
   Ministry of Justice of the Mongolian People’s Republic], in 2 Үндсэн хууль, түүнд
   холбогдох хууль тогтоомжийн эмхтгэл [THE CONSTITUTION AND OTHER RELEVANT
   LAWS] 20 (1974). See also Бүгд Найрамдах Монгол Ард Улсын Шүүх яамны
   дүрэм [The Regulation on the Ministry of Justice of the Mongolian People’s
   Republic], in Хууль, зарлиг, тогтоолын эмхтгэл [THE LAWS AND REGULATIONS OF
   THE MONGOLIAN PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC] 93-96 (1952).
33 Улсын прокуроруудын тухай дүрэм [The Regulation on the Procurator’s Office], in
   57 Засгийн газрын Албан сэтгүүл [THE OFFICIAL STATE GAZETTE] 162-173 (1930)
   (Mong.).
34 Прокурорын хяналтын хууль [The Law on Procuracy], in БНМАУ-ын хуулиуд
   [THE LAWS OF THE MONGOLIAN PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC] 710-722 (1980) (Mong.).
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia                171


                                                                  35
subordinated to them, as well as by officials and citizens”.           Besides
that, the procurator “exercises control over the legality and the validity
                                            36
of judicial decisions, criminal or civil”,       which in other systems would
amount to usurping the function of the judiciary.

      Therefore, the Mongolian courts were fully accountable to the
government and political forces. This is not surprising, as the existence
of independent courts and judges would challenge the core of the
totalitarian character of the state and the absolute power of the
Mongolian Peoples’ Revolutionary Party. As a result, during the socialist
period (1921-1990) judicial independence was practically non-existent
in Mongolia.



II. Three-Phased Judicial Reform and its Impact on
    the Independence of the Mongolian Judiciary

      In the last twenty years, many legislative acts have been enacted
and implemented in relation to the legal sector of Mongolia. The
operation of courts has advanced and its impact on development of the
country has increased as the court administration and infrastructure has
strengthened.

a.    Constitutional and Legislative Development at the First
      Phase of Legal Reform
      After the collapse of the socialist system, legal reform in Mongolia



35 Id. at 710.
36 Id. at 711.
172                                         《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


                                                                                    37
received new impetus. The new Constitution of Mongolia (1992)                            not
only proclaimed the equal status of the judiciary in relation to the
legislative and executive branches of government, but also setup a
number of general principles of judicial organization. These general
                                                                                          38
principles include administration of justice and the judicial system,
                                                                             39
basic requirements for entry into judicial service,                               judicial
                  40                                      41
independence,          irremovability of judges,               and financing of the
        42
courts.      Several important legislative acts concerning the judiciary and


37 See Монгол Улсын Үндсэн хууль [CONSTITUTION OF MONGOLIA], in 1 Tөрийн
   мэдээлэл [THE STATE BULLETIN] (1992); The Constitution of Mongolia, in 5 Монгол
   Улсын Үндсэн хууль: монгол, англи, франц, герман, япон, хятад, солонгос
   хэлээр [THE CONSTITUTION OF MONGOLIA: IN MONGOLIAN, ENGLISH, FRENCH,
   GERMAN, JAPANESE, CHINESE, KOREAN LANGUAGES] 61-86 (2014).
38 “1. Judicial power shall be vested exclusively in Courts. 2. The unlawful
   establishment of a Court under any circumstances and the exercise of judicial power
   by any organisation other than the Courts shall be prohibited. 3. Courts shall be
   established solely under the Constitution and other laws.” CONSTITUTION OF
   MONGOLIA, supra note 37, art. 47.
39 A Mongolian citizen of thirty-five years of age with higher legal education and
   experience in judicial practice of not less than ten years may be appointed as a judge
   of the Supreme Court. A Mongolian citizen of twenty-five years of age with higher
   legal education and legal practice of not less than three years may be appointed as a
   judge of the other Courts. Id. art. 51.3.
40 1. Judges shall be independent and subject only to law. 2. It shall be prohibited for a
   private person or any civil officer (including the President, Prime Minister, members
   of the State Great Hural or the Government or an official of a political party or other
   public organisation) to interfere with the exercise by the judges of their duties. 3. A
   Judicial General Council shall function for the purpose of ensuring the independence
   of the judiciary. 4. The Judicial General Council, without interfering in the activities
   of Courts and judges, shall deal exclusively with the selection of judges from among
   lawyers; protection of their rights and other matters pertaining to ensuring conditions
   exist for guaranteeing the independence of the judiciary. Id. art. 49.
41 “Removal of a judge of a Court of any instance shall be prohibited except in cases
   when he/she is relieved at his/her own request or removed on the grounds provided
   for in the Constitution and/or the law on the judiciary or by a valid Court decision.” Id.
   art. 51.4.
42 “The Courts shall be financed from the State budget. The State shall ensure economic
   guarantee of the Courts’ activities.” Id. art. 48.3.
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia                      173


aimed towards the implementation of the constitutional provisions,
                                         43                              44
namely the new Law on Courts,                 the new Criminal Code , the new
                                 45                           46
Law on Criminal Procedure , the new Civil Code,                    and the new Law
                       47
on Civil Procedure,         were passed during the first two phases of judicial
reform. Among these legislative advancements, the adoption of the Law
on Courts stands as the event of major importance. Being Mongolia’s
first Law to define the status of judges and citizens’ representatives, it
was designed to improve the status of Mongolian judges from their
traditional low level.

       Since legal education and training play a decisive role for civil law
judges, the main issues related to judicial personnel such as legal
education, recruitment and training, as well as the limitation on the
power of the executive or legislative in the areas of compensation and
tenure were identified and secured at the legislative level.

b.     Legislative Development at the Second Phase of the
       Judicial Reform
       The “Mongolian legal reforms program” was adopted in 1998 by
                                                             48
the Resolution No.18 of the State Great Hural.                    . The first step in


43 Шүүхийн тухай хууль [The Law on Courts], in 4-5 Төрийн мэдээлэл [THE STATE
     BULLETIN] 957-972 (1993) (Mong.).
44 Эрүүгийн хууль [The Criminal Code], in 5 Төрийн мэдээлэл [THE STATE BULLETIN]
     113-169 (2002) (Mong.).
45 Эрүүгийн байцаан шийтгэх хууль [The Code on Criminal Procedure], in 6 Төрийн
     мэдээлэл [THE STATE BULLETIN] 172-250 (2002) (Mong.).
46 Иргэний хууль [The Civil Code], in 7 Төрийн мэдээлэл [THE STATE BULLETIN] 257-
     384 (2002) (Mong.).
47 Иргэний байцаан шийтгэх хууль [The Code on Civil Procedure], in 8 Төрийн
     мэдээлэл [THE STATE BULLETIN] 385-468 (2002) (Mong.).
48 Хөтөлбөр, үндсэн чиглэл, төлөвлөгөө батлах тухай Улсын Их Хурлын тогтоол
     [The Resolution of the State Great Hural on the adoption of the Programme, Main
174                                      《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


advancing this program was the newly revised Law on Courts of
                                   49
Mongolia adopted in 2002.               This Law established more detailed
regulations concerning the legal basis for the judicial system,
organization, powers and operations. The main novelty of the 2002
amendments to the Law on Courts was the clarification of who would
serve as the Chairman of the Judicial General Council. In order to stress
its importance, we should look at this question retrospectively.
According to Article 33.3 of the 1993 Law on the Courts, the Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court was elected as Chairman. Consequently,
the article was revised in 1996 to provide that “the Chairman of the
Judicial General Council shall be the Cabinet Member in charge of legal
        50
affairs.”        Thus, the Minister of Justice and Internal Affairs started to
assume the role of the Chairman of the Judicial General Council. The
rationale for this change was to ensure that the Judicial General Council
had a strong voice in budgetary discussions within the Government.
However, the Law on Courts was revised again in 2002 to provide that
                                                51
the Chief Justice would be the Chairman.             This reflected a view that
the goal of judicial independence is better served when judges play a
role in judicial administration. In particular, the Minister of Justice as a
political official was deemed inappropriate to chair the Judicial General
            52
Council.


   Directions and Plan of Activities], Эрх зүйн мэдээллийн нэгдсэн систем
   [INTEGRATED LEGAL INFORMATION SYSTEM] (1998), http://legalinfo.mn/law/details/
   6881?lawid=6881.
49 Шүүхийн тухай хууль [The Law on Courts], in 29 Төрийн мэдээлэл [THE STATE
   BULLETIN] 960 (2002) (Mong.).
50 Шүүхийн тухай хууль [The Law on Courts], in 8 Төрийн мэдээлэл [THE STATE
   BULLETIN] 458 (1996) (Mong.).
51 See The Law on Courts, supra note 49, at 966.
52 TOM GINSBURG & CHIMID ENKHBAATAR EDS., THE ROLE OF THE CONSTITUTION OF
   MONGOLIA IN CONSOLIDATING DEMOCRACY: AN ANALYSIS 73 (2015).
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia                      175


     The 2002 reforms also corrected a minor legal error in the Law on
Courts relevant to the Constitution. The 1993 Law had said that “As
provided in the Constitution, the General Council is a co-management
and ex-officio organization with the function to ensure the impartiality of
judges and independence of the judiciary.” This was problematic
because the Constitution says nothing about the Judicial General Council
being an ex officio body. The phrase “as provided in the Constitution”
                                                     53
was removed from the revised Law on Courts.

     The first policy document for the judicial reform, the “Judicial
Strategic Plan of Mongolia”, adopted by the State Great Hural
                                       54
Resolution No. 39 in 2000                   was crucial in advancing the
                                                                                 55
implementation of the legal reform, and strengthening of the judiciary.

     However, the revised Law on Courts did not fully meet the needs of
the judiciary. In order for the Mongolian judiciary to become a true
guarantor of human rights, freedom and democracy there was growing
demand to ensure independence and impartiality of judges, increase
institutional effectiveness and performance of the Mongolian judiciary,
and strengthen its transparency and accountability.

c.    The Current Phase of the Judicial Reform
     On April 15, 2010, the National Security Council of Mongolia

53 Id.
54 Шүүх эрх мэдлийн стратеги төлөвлөгөө батлах тухай Улсын Их Хурлын тогтоол
   [The Resolution of the State Great Hural on the Adoption of the Judicial Strategic
   Plan of Mongolia], Эрх зүйн мэдээллийн нэгдсэн систем [INTEGRATED LEGAL
   INFORMATION SYSTEM] (May 4, 2000), http://legalinfo.mn/law/details/6946?lawid=
   6946.
55 Ж. Амарсанаа, Б. Чимид, Р. Мухийт, Л. Төр-Од [J. AMARSANAA, B. CHIMID, R.
   MUHIIT & L. TUR-OD], Монгол Улсын шүүх эрх мэдлийн шинэтгэл [THE REFORM
   OF THE MONGOLIAN JUDICIARY] 13 (2010).
176                                      《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


issued recommendations to intensify judicial and legal reforms, which
was followed by the “Program to Deepen Judicial Reforms”.

      Subsequently, the National Legal Forum held on 14-15, April 2011
in Ulaanbaatar collected valuable comments and recommendations on
legal reform and changes to the organization and structure of the
judiciary provided by representatives of judiciary and law enforcement
agencies, civil society, academia and citizens.

      As a result, the package of laws, which represents the most
comprehensive legal and institutional reform in the judiciary since the
1990s, was adopted by the State Great Hural in 2012-2013. This package
of laws consists of the Law on the Judiciary of Mongolia (dated 7 March,
       56                                                                            57
2012),      the Law on Judicial Administration (dated 22 May, 2012),
                                                                               58
the Law on the Legal Status of Lawyers (dated 7 March, 2012),                       the
                                                                     59
Law on the Legal Status of Judges (dated 7 March, 2012),                  the Law on
the Legal Status of Citizens’ Representatives in Courts (dated 22 May
       60
2012),      and the Law on Reconciliation and Meditation (dated 22 May,
       61
2012).      These laws provide an “opportunity to implement the right to
fair and independent trial guaranteed by the Constitution of Mongolia by


56 Монгол Улсын Шүүхийн тухай хууль [The Law on the Judiciary of Mongolia], in
   11 Төрийн мэдээлэл [THE STATE BULLETIN] 594-608 (2012).
57 Шүүхийн захиргааны тухай хууль [The Law on Judicial Administration], in 24
   Төрийн мэдээлэл [THE STATE BULLETIN] 1509-1527 (2012) (Mong.).
58 Хуульчийн эрх зүйн байдлын тухай хууль [The Law on the Legal Status of
   Lawyers], in 11 Төрийн мэдээлэл [THE STATE BULLETIN] 633-671 (2012) (Mong.).
59 Шүүгчийн эрх зүйн байдлын тухай хууль [The Law on the Legal Status of Judges],
   in 11 Төрийн мэдээлэл [THE STATE BULLETIN] 594-608 (2012) (Mong.).
60 Шүүхийн иргэдийн төлөөлөгчийн эрх зүйн байдлын тухай хууль [The Law on
   the Legal Status of Citizens’ Representatives in Courts], in 11 Төрийн мэдээлэл [THE
   STATE BULLETIN] 610-632 (2012) (Mong.).
61 Эвлэрүүлэн зуучлалын тухай хууль [The Law on Reconciliation and Meditation],
   in 25 Төрийн мэдээлэл [THE STATE BULLETIN] 1566-1582 (2012) (Mong.).
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia                       177


ensuring the independence, openness, and transparency of courts,
managing the work balance of the courts and specialization of judges
                                                                        62
and ensuring the budget and administrative independence.”                    The main
purposes of these laws are to clarify the status of lawyers and the legal
profession, to restructure court administration and the operations of the
judiciary, and to regulate alternative forms of dispute resolution such as
conciliation and mediation. For example, the Law on the Legal Status of
Judges aims “to regulate legal grounds for qualification of judges with
the judiciary mandate set forth in the Constitution of Mongolia, the
power, grounds, and procedures for termination, and guarantee for
                                                                   63
impartiality, as well as sanctions for violators of the law”.

     Thus, the major safeguards of judicial independence related to
appointment, promotion, discipline, tenure, compensation and financing
are established in Mongolia now either at a constitutional or legislative
level. All legal acts adopted in the course of the three-stage judicial
reform were designed to provide for greater judicial independence.

     It should be noted that the success of judicial reform became
possible with the help of international donors. Since the late 1990’s, the
World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, USAID, GTZ, the Hanns-
Seidel Foundation, and the Japan International Cooperation Agency
(JICA), among others, have invested tens of millions of dollars to
                                          64
“reform” the Mongolian judiciary. The international partners remain


62 The office of the President of Mongolia, Introduction on Draft Law on Judiciary and
   Other Relevant Draft Laws on Mongolia, PRESIDENT OF MONGOLIA (Sept. 1, 2011),
   http://www.president.mn/eng/newsCenter/viewEvent.php?cid=22&newsId=608&new
   sEvent=Drafts%20laws%20on%20judiciary%20reformp.
63 Id.
64 USAID alone invested US$13.5 million in its Mongolia Judicial Reform Project
   between 2001 and 2006. The World Bank spent US$5 million in a judicial reform
178                                         《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


committed to supporting Mongolia in its efforts toward the creation of a
sound justice system. There are several projects just finished or under
way aimed at establishing good governance (supported by the Asian
Foundation), improving the justice sector’s service (sponsored by the
World Bank), creating a favorable legal environment for sustainable
economic development (financed by the Deutsche Gesellschaft für
Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ, formerly known as GTZ)), and
enhancing the reconciliation process (supported by the Japan
International Cooperation Agency JICA).

      However, the level of independence of the Mongolian judiciary is
                                       65
still far from what is desired.             Traditions of the socialist past have
undoubtedly had a significant influence on the Mongolian judiciary
throughout its recent history. Despite the independent status of the
judiciary under the new Constitution, its old internal culture and modus
operandi continue to hamper the establishment of an independent
judicial branch with strong status and powers. The judges’ function is to


   project begun in 2001, and recently announced another US$5 million dollar project in
   June of 2008 to “support Mongolian justice sector institutions in enhancing their
   efficiency, transparency and accountability through capacity improvements”. BRENT T.
   WHITE, REPORT ON THE STATUS OF COURT REFORM IN MONGOLIA 5 (2009),
   http://forum.mn/res_mat/Judicial_Reform_Assessment-eng.pdf.
65 In a study conducted by Brent T. White in his article, 50% of experts surveyed
   disagreed with the statement, “Court decisions are respected and enforced by other
   branches of government.” These experts also indicated that the executive branch often
   does not honor court decisions with which it disagrees. One expert even indicated that
   tax inspectors feel free to ignore decisions by the courts when they believe the courts’
   interpretation to be wrong. In the same study, only 19% of the experts surveyed
   agreed that “Court decisions are free from political influence from other branches of
   government or other public officials.” These experts shared the view that high-ranking
   government officials, including the President, exert considerable influence over the
   courts, especially where the personal, political or business interests of the government
   are at stake. See Brent T. White, Rotten to the Core: Project Capture and the Failure
   of Judicial Reform in Mongolia, 4 EAST ASIA L. REV. 209, 225, 230 (2009).
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia             179


simply apply the law. Such a restricted attitude or self-restraint of judges
continues to contribute to their minor role and low esteem.



III. Some Aspects of Judicial Independence in Mongolia

     The concept of judicial independence is multi-faceted. There are
many aspects related to the independence of individual judges, as well as
many aspects related to the independence of the judiciary as a whole.
The essential elements of the independence of a judiciary as an
institution are as follows: 1) the judiciary should function as a separate
government branch that is equal in standing and status to the executive
and legislative branches; 2) in order to be independent, the judiciary
should be self-policing; 3) as an independent entity, the judiciary should
prepare and submit the budget for the judicial branch. Alternatively, the
personal independence of judges includes clear and transparent
procedures that are applied to judicial appointments and assignments;
tenure of sufficient length (usually they should be appointed for life);
sufficient and appropriate salaries; and promotion based on an objective
assessment of the judge’s integrity, professional competence, and
experience. In addition, judges should only be subject to discipline or
removal for misconduct or incapacity by a tribunal composed primarily
or entirely of judges. On the other hand, judges should have sufficiently
high minimum qualifications in education and experience. A number of
important constitutional amendments and legislative innovations should
be emphasized in this regard.

a.    Selection
     It is vital that persons appointed to be judges should be suitable for
180                                       《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


the role they are to perform. Their responsibility for upholding the rule
of law requires them to be independent, impartial, honest, and competent.
Therefore, the reasons for establishing high standards for persons
wishing to become a judge are twofold: strong and knowledgeable
candidates with high moral standards should be attracted to the bench,
while anyone who for whatever reason is not fit to be a judge should be
turned away. For this reason the qualification standard needs to be
sufficiently strict.

      After the beginning of the recent legal reforms, some steps toward
attracting to the bench candidates with substantial life experience and
professional knowledge have been made. The 1992 Constitution and the
Law on Courts (1993) required a candidate for a judgeship to satisfy
stricter than ever qualifications: higher legal education, and the
completion of a period of professional legal work (at least three years for
the lower court judges, and at least ten years for the Supreme Court
          66
justices).     The next Law on the Courts (2002) added the requirement of
                                         67
passing a qualifying examination.

      The newly adopted Law on the Legal Status of Judges (2012)
further enhanced the qualification requirements for potential wearers of
the judge’s gown. According to this Law, requirements for judicial
service now include not only a minimum age, university degree in law,
and work experience in the legal field, but also good command of the
Mongolian language, a high moral reputation, and good health. A would-
                                                                         68
be judge must also not have been convicted of any crime.


66 Шүүхийн тухай хууль [The Law on Courts], in 2 Төрийн мэдээлэл [THE STATE
   BULLETIN] 157 (1993) (Mong.).
67 See The Law on Courts, supra note 49.
68 See The Law on the Legal Status of Judges, supra note 59, art. 4.1.
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia                 181


b.     Appointment
      The importance of the manner of the appointment or election for
judicial independence cannot be underestimated. The most striking
judicial reform achievements have been made in the area of judicial
appointments. For example, the method of the election of the Mongolian
judges has been changed: from popular elections in traditional one-
candidate elections to the appointment of judges by the President in
order to insulate the Mongolian judges from the “directing” influence of
the local legislatures, as well as from the “mobilizing” influence of the
Party and administrative apparatus. The Constitution authorizes the
President of Mongolia to appoint judges of all courts, except the justices
of the Supreme Court, who have to be approved by the State Great Hural
                                                   69
on the proposal of the President of Mongolia.           It should be noted that
the initial selection of the candidates for the judicial position is organised
by the Judicial General Council, which bases its decisions on the
recommendations of the Judicial Qualification Commission and
                                                              70
conclusions of the Mongolian Lawyers’ Association.                 However, the
President has real discretion in the process of making the final
nomination for appointment to a judicial vacancy.

c.     Tenure
      The tenure of judges is historically considered to be a major
safeguard of judicial independence. It is obvious that the independence
of judges cannot be safeguarded without guaranteeing their tenure in
office. Therefore, legally established security of tenure is one important
area where the judiciary is supported in upholding the rule of law. The


69 Id. art. 15.1.
70 Id. art. 10-13.
182                                       《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


IBA Minimum Standards on Judicial Independence states: “Judicial
appointments should generally be for life, subject to removal for cause
and compulsory retirement at an age fixed by law at the date of
                            71
appointment” (art. 22).          According to the Constitution and respective
laws, all Mongolian judges are to be appointed for life (the compulsory
retirement age for all Mongolian judges is 60). However, it should be
noted that the President failed to reappoint judges several times without
                                               72
providing any plausible explanations.               There is no guarantee that such
a situation will not be repeated again with every instance of change to
the organization of the courts. Therefore, Article 51.4 of the Constitution,
which states “removal of a judge of a court of any instance shall be
prohibited except in cases when he/she is relieved at his/her own request
or removed on the grounds provided for in the Constitution and/or the
law on the judiciary and by a valid court decision”, has not provided an
adequate safeguard to the term of judicial appointments.

71 Int’l Bar Ass’n [IBA], IBA Minimum Standards on Judicial Independence, art. 22
   (1982), https://www.ibanet.org/Document/Default.aspx?DocumentUid=bb019013-52b1-
   427c-ad25-a6409b49fe29.
72 Despite the proposal by the General Judicial Council of Mongolia that the President
   of Mongolia release from office and then re-appoint all first-instance and appeals
   court judges working in accordance with 2013 Law on Establishment of the Court to
   the reorganized court, the President in issuing the resolution on the re-appointment of
   judges to circuit courts appointed 397 judges from a total of 409; thus failing to re-
   appoint 12 judges. Judges dismissed in this way were not informed in advance that
   they would not be re-appointed, and it remains unclear as to the grounds upon which
   they failed to be re-appointed. Judges who failed to be re-appointed on uncertain
   grounds, along with the Mongolian Bar Association, raised this issue with the General
   Judicial Council, the Office of the President of Mongolia, the Constitutional Tsets
   (Court), the first-instance civil court and the civil appeals court to no avail. See Ж.
   Хунан, П. Баттулга, М. Мөнхжаргал [J. HUNAN, P. BATTULGA & М. MUNKHJARGAL],
   Шүүхийн бие даасан, шүүгчийн хараат бус байдлын баталгаа: Шүүгчийн
   томилгоо [GUARANTEE OF JUDICIAL INDEPENDENCE AND IMPARTIALITY: JUDICIAL
   APPOINTMENT] 96-97 (2015). This situation was repeated again with the re-
   appointment of judges in accordance with 2015 Law on the Establishment of the
   Court, where one judge was not re-appointed and was thus dismissed.
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia                 183


d.    Political Neutrality of Judges
      De-politicization of the Mongolian judiciary was the first serious
problem encountered at the beginning of the judicial reform process. It
was obvious that party influence on the Mongolian judges was fully in
contradiction with judicial independence. Therefore, the necessity of de-
politicizing judicial business as much as possible was universally
recognized. Any interference in the activity of judges was prohibited at
the constitutional and legislative level. In order to eliminate party
influence, the new Constitution of Mongolia provides that “Party
membership of some categories of state employees may be
              73
suspended”.        The State Great Hural of Mongolia adopted a Law “On
Prohibition of Party Membership of Some Categories of State
Employees” (“De-Politicization Law”) on August 28, 1991, which
barred members of the Mongolian Revolutionary Party’ organizations
from working in government bodies, institutions and organizations,
including courts. This rule was confirmed by the Law on Courts of
      74
1993.      The current Law on the Status of Judges also directly prohibits
                                                                       75
judges from belonging to any political party or movement.

e.    Discipline and Removal
      Issues of judicial discipline are very important in terms of
implementing the principle of an independent judiciary. As mentioned
previously, the judiciary should be independent of other branches of
government in order to properly perform its functions of judicial review,
although this does not mean that the judiciary is exempt from any type


73 CONSTITUTION OF MONGOLIA, supra note 37, art. 16.10.
74 The Law on Courts, supra note 66, art. 62.3.
75 See The Law on the Legal Status of Judges, supra note 59, art. 28.1.1.
184                                         《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


                        76
of accountability.           Independence of the judiciary should not be
absolute     and       needs    to    be    balanced       carefully     with     judicial
                  77
accountability.

      Judicial accountability can be defined as the duty of a policy-maker
                                                                                          78
to justify its actions or decisions and, if necessary, to correct them.
While the independence of the judiciary is the source of its legitimacy,
judicial accountability is the basis of its conformity with society’s
democratic principles and legitimate interests. Peculiarities of the legal
and political culture of a given country will determine whether it will
favor judicial independence or judicial accountability.

      The types of judicial accountability followed in a given society may
                                                                                 79
substantially influence the extent of judicial independence;                          as a


76 In order to have confidence in the judicial system, the public should get an assurance
   that appropriate levels of performance are reached and that minimum standards of
   competence and ethical conduct are upheld.
77 At first glance, the two principles may appear to contradict each other because there
   seems to be a problem of reconciling the conflicting demands of judicial
   independence with the demands of accountability and essential levels of judicial
   competence. However, if judicial independence can be properly conceived as relating
   primarily to judicial-governmental relations (and, secondarily, to judicial relations
   with other powerful elites), judicial accountability is better understood as referring to
   institutional accountability to the civil society first, which is true for the rest of the
   government. See Stephen B. Burbank, The Past and Present of Judicial Independence,
   80 JUDICATURE 117, 117-18 (1996). It has been said that “the question is not whether
   there should be judicial accountability but how judicial accountability can be balanced
   with judicial independence.” Robert D. Nicholson, Judicial Independence and
   Accountability: Can They Co-exist?, 67 AUSTRALIAN L.J. 404, 414 (1993). Such
   balancing can be achieved by introduction of different modes of judicial
   accountability, first and foremost of which is accountability to the law.
78 See Rajeev Dhavan, Judges and Accountability, in JUDGING AND THE JUDICIAL POWER
   165, 167 (Rajeev Dhavan et al. eds., 1985); DAWN OLIVER & GAVIN DREWRY, PUBLIC
   SERVICE REFORMS: ISSUES OF ACCOUNTABILITY AND PUBLIC LAW 134 (1996).
79 Cappelletti and Shetreet offer two different theoretical classifications of the types of
   judicial accountability. Cappelletti’s classification includes as main types of judicial
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia                              185


consequence, not every method used to hold public officers politically
accountable for their actions and decisions can be used for members of
                 80
the judiciary.        For example, forms of “hard” political accountability
such as the removal or dismissal from office cannot be used towards
judges simply because their decisions are controversial. The use of
alternative forms of responsibility such as, for example, disciplinary
proceedings, public censure, and civil or criminal liability is
               81
constrained.

      The Universal Charter of the Judge states in art. 11: “The
administration of the judiciary and disciplinary action towards judges
must be organized in such a way that it does not compromise the judges’
genuine independence, and that attention is only paid to considerations
                                       82
both objective and relevant.”               Also the UN Basic Principles on the




   accountability political (or constitutional), societal (or public), legal (vicarious) and
   legal (personal) accountability. Shetreet recognizes legal accountability, public
   accountability, and informal and social controls. A closer look at them reveals that
   different classifications have more similarities than differences. Legal accountability
   of a judge in both classifications includes penal, civil and disciplinary accountability.
   The penal accountability involves the criminal code provisions generally applicable to
   public servants, while the civil liability and disciplinary responsibility of an individual
   judge are confined to certain substantive and procedural limitations and special rules.
   Although a judge should bear negative consequences of his or her wrongdoings, such
   restrictions are dictated by the need to preserve judicial independence. See MAURO
   CAPPELLETTI, THE JUDICIAL PROCESS IN COMPARATIVE PERSPECTIVE 73-103 (1991).
   For the most notable attempt to define it, see SIMON J. SHETREET & JULES DESCHENES
   EDS., JUDICIAL INDEPENDENCE: THE CONTEMPORARY DEBATE 595 (1985).
80 Although it does get money for its operations from public funds, the judiciary is not
   responsible to the executive and the legislative in the same way as other public
   officials. See KATE MALLESON, THE NEW JUDICIARY: THE EFFECTS OF EXPANSION AND
   ACTIVISM 39 (1999).
81 Id.
82 The Universal Charter of the Judge, INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF JUDGES, art. 11,
   www.iaj-uim.org/universal-charter-of-the-judges/ (last visited July 17, 2017).
186                                        《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


                                     83
Independence of the Judiciary             set forth a principle that all disciplinary,
suspension or removal proceedings shall be determined in accordance
                                                        84
with established standards of judicial conduct.

       Mongolia looks good in this regard, with powerful guarantees of
the independence of judges in terms of removal and discipline
predetermined at both constitutional and legislative levels. The current
Law on the Judiciary provides that judges are irremovable from office.
Article 20.1 of this Law states: “Judges shall be independent and shall be
subordinated only to the Constitution, officially published laws, and
international treaties to which Mongolia is a party. They shall be
accountable to no one in their activity with regard to the effectuation of
justice.” The power to discipline and remove a judge was placed
exclusively in the hands of the Mongolian judiciary. According to the
Law on Judicial Administration, the Committee on Ethics consisting of
prominent lawyers (mainly judges) is established with the function of
                                                                  85
deciding the cases of alleged judges’ misconduct.                      Judges may be
removed from their office and their power may be suspended or
terminated, but only on the grounds and by the procedure established by
      86
law.       According to this Law, a judge’s authority may be terminated
under the following circumstances: if a judge has been found guilty of
committing a crime; if a judge has engaged in activities which are
incompatible with the duties of a judge (the Law prohibits a judge from
engaging in any outside paid activity other than teaching and research);
if a judge’s incapacity (or inability to perform his/her duties) is proven


83 See Basic Principles on the Independence of the Judiciary, supra note 2.
84 See also “The grounds for removal of judges shall be fixed by law and shall be clearly
   defined.” IBA, supra note 71, art. 29(a).
85 The Law on Judicial Administration, supra note 57, art. 30-31.
86 The Law on the Legal Status of Judges, supra note 59, art. 17.1, 18.3, 18.4.
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia                     187


by medical examination and documents; if a judge after being formally
reprimanded has shown repeated neglect of duty; or if his or her
                                                            87
lawyer’s professional license has been terminated.

f.    Internal Independence of the Judiciary
      One of the current directions of judicial reform is to make a court
management system more democratic. It is necessary to differentiate
powers of a judge and the chair of a court: as a judge he or she is to be
appointed for life, and as the chair of the court—for a limited term. This
has a number of advantages: first, rotation will always bring fresh views,
and, on the other hand, a judge will see the perspectives of his or her
career more clearly. A chief judge of the Supreme Court is appointed for
a term of six years, while the chairs of other courts are appointed for a
                                                                           88
term of three years, which can be extended for another term. The chief
judge heads the respective court; however, it is prohibited by law for him
or her to interfere with the exercise of judicial authority by any judge, by
the issuance of directives, guidelines, the assignment of a case to a
                                                   89
particular judge, or in any other manner.               According to Article 13 of
the Law on the Judiciary of Mongolia, the chair of the respective court
exercises the following powers: represents the court in domestic and
foreign relations; announces, organizes and convenes the panel of judges,
and organizes enforcement of decisions of the panel; chairs court
hearings, appoints a chair and other judges, supervises operation of the
chamber of the court; organizes meetings with citizens regarding
relevant laws; and reviews written petitions and requests from citizens
and legal entities.

87 Id. art. 18.4.
88 The Law on the Judiciary of Mongolia, supra note 56, art. 12.3, 12.4.
89 Id. art. 6.3.
188                                       《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


g.    Compensation
      Adequate compensation for judicial work is another key aspect of
judicial independence. Appropriate salaries and benefits are essential to
the proper functioning of the judiciary. The UN Basic Principles on the
Independence of the Judiciary states that there should be ‘adequate
                                 90
remuneration’ for judges.             The same wording can be found in the
Beijing Statement on Principles of the Independence of the Judiciary in
                           91
the LAWASIA Region.             Judges’ salaries should be sufficiently high to
correspond to the dignity of the profession, and to make a judicial career
an attractive alternative to young graduates making a choice of a
professional career.

      The compensation for judges is prescribed by the Law on the Legal
Status of Judges, which provides: “Remuneration for the office of the
judge shall be sufficient to provide for their economic independence and
                                              92
commensurate with their livelihoods.”              Under the law, judicial salary is
composed of the basic payment and extra pay for judicial qualifications
                                  93
and number of years served.            The law also contains provision for extra
pay in accordance with other laws and acts. Extra pay is provided for
                                                                                      94
scientific degrees, and ranges from 5 to 10 per cent of basic payment.
Also corresponding laws set forth guarantees for a reasonable


90 Basic Principles on the Independence of the Judiciary, supra note 2, art. 11.
91 The Law Ass’n for Asia and the Pacific [LAWASIA], The Beijing Statement of Principle
   of the Independence of the Judiciary in the LAWASIA Region, art. 31 (Aug. 19, 1995),
   https://www.hurights.or.jp/archives/other_documents/section1/1995/08/beijing-state
   ment-of-principles-of-the-independence-of-the-judiciary-in-the-lawasia-region-beijing-
   1.html.
92 The Law on the Legal Status of Judges, supra note 59, art. 23.1.
93 Id.
94 Төрийн албаны тухай хууль [Тhe Law on State Service], in 28 Tөрийн мэдээлэл
   [THE STATE BULLETIN] 903, art. 28.2.1 (2002) (Mong.).
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia                      189


remuneration in case of illness, maternity leave, and for the payment of a
retirement pension, which has a reasonable relationship to their level of
                                      95
remuneration when working.

       Judicial salaries are not yet adequate, and would still considered
low by Western standards, but they have substantially increased in
relation to that of many civil servants, although these increases in
salaries sometimes came at the expense of the administrative budgets of
courts, since they are not always accompanied by increases in the overall
court budgets. It is prohibited to reduce the component and amount of
                     96
judicial salaries.

h.      Other Aspects of the Independence of Mongolian Judges
       The Law on the Legal Status of Judges serves as the legal basis for
ensuring other aspects of judicial independence and immunity. For
example, no law or administrative act that weakens the legal, economic
and social guarantees of the independence and safety of judges may be
           97
enacted.        Judges also have immunity with respect to their person,
office, home, transportation, means of communication, documents,
                                           98
properties, and correspondence.

i.      Institutional Independence of the Mongolian Judiciary
       The judiciary should decide disputes without regard to the policies,
preferences or interests of the government of the day; this may
sometimes lead judges to confrontation with the political branches.


95 The Law on the Legal Status of Judges, supra note 59, art. 23-24; The Law on State
     Service, supra note 94, art. 27, 29-32.
96 The Law on the Legal Status of Judges, supra note 59, art. 23.5.
97 Id. art. 20.3.
98 Id. art. 26.
190                                        《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


Therefore, it is important that judges should not be the subjects of
control by the political regime, and that they should be shielded from
any threats, interference, or manipulation which may either force them to
unjustly favor the state or subject themselves to punishment for not
doing so. Most importantly, the power holders must be willing to uphold
the court decisions, even when they disagree with the decision itself.

      Only the judiciary, which is independent of the executive and
legislature, is able to effectively restrain the other branches of power.
Hence, the status of the judiciary as the co-equal and independent branch
of government should be maintained.

      During the entire socialist period, the Mongolian judiciary was
considered to be a part of the executive branch. The Ministry of Justice
administered all material, financial and technical aspects of the activities
of the court system. Not surprisingly, courts always felt pressure coming
from the executive branch.

      Dependency of the courts on the executive has been removed by the
               99
Constitution        and the 1993 Law on Courts (art. 32-54). With the
creation of the Judicial General Council, the Ministry of Justice was
finally released of its functions relating to the maintenance of the courts,
technical supply, retraining of judges and staff recruitment. Its remaining
functions related to the supervision of court activity were also



99 “3. A Judicial General Council shall function for the purpose of ensuring the
   independence of the judiciary; 4. The Judicial General Council, without interfering in
   the activities of courts and judges, shall deal exclusively with the selection of judges
   from among lawyers, protection of their rights and other matters pertaining to
   ensuring conditions for guaranteeing the independence of the judiciary; 5. The
   structure and procedures of the Judicial General Council shall be defined by law.”
   CONSTITUTION OF MONGOLIA, supra note 37, аrt. 49.
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia                         191


                                                    100
transferred to the Judicial General Council.

j.    Financing of the Courts
      The financing of the court system is very important to the collective
independence of the judiciary. The difficult financial situation of the
Mongolian courts during the early days of reform was reflective of the
broader hardships caused by economic reform as Mongolia moved away
from socialism. While the financial situation of Mongolian courts has
improved somewhat, they remain inadequately funded. Severe under-
financing of the courts negatively affects every aspect of judicial work.
The insufficiency of funding not only renders judges increasingly
vulnerable to bribery and outside influence, thus deleteriously affecting
the impartiality of judges, but also precludes the courts as an institution
from asserting financial independence.

      The Constitution of Mongolia prescribed that the judicial system
                                                    101
has to be financed from the state budget.                 According to the Law on
the Judiciary of Mongolia, the judiciary shall have a separate budget
                                                                   102
which is an integral part of the state central budget.                   The judiciary
shall be financially independent and the government shall ensure its
                                                                                     103
continuous operation by providing adequate financial support.



100 The various functions of the Judicial General Council include questions of personnel
    (determining norms for caseload, need for new positions, helping to recruit,
    organizing perks and benefits for judges and other court employees, developing
    training etc.); organizational matters (including systems of court records, archives,
    statistics); and resource questions (support for the courts and the agencies of the
    judicial corporation: the judicial qualification commissions and the councils of
    judges.).
101 CONSTITUTION OF MONGOLIA, supra note 37, art. 48.3.
102 The Law on the Judiciary of Mongolia, supra note 56, art. 28.2.
103 Id. art. 6.4.
192                                      《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


Staffing, budget, and finance shall be adequate to ensure the
independence of the judiciary and the impartiality of judges. On the
other hand, the judiciary is strictly prohibited from receiving any
donations in any form from domestic and foreign individuals or legal
persons, except international, humanitarian aid and loan programs
                                                                              104
through official agreements between Mongolia and foreign parties.

       The experience of other countries shows that a self-administered
court budget is very important to maintaining collective judicial
independence. To be dependent on the executive for apportioning the
budget means that courts can be hostage to the executive for financing
judicial operations. Thus, one of the recent directions of legal reform
was to give the courts power to administer their own budget. Under the
Law on the Judiciary of Mongolia, the Judicial General Council now
plays a central role in creating and submitting its budget request, thus
ensuring that it receives all the funds appropriated to it. The Judicial
General Council develops the judiciary budget, including an operational
budget and capital investment budget for all courts, and submits the
                                              105
budget directly to the State Great Hural.

       Currently there has been an increase in the percentage share which
                                                        106
the court budget receives from the state budget.              According to a 2015
Court Statistical Report by the Judicial General Council of Mongolia, the
court budget share in the state budget increased to 0.65 percent in 2013,


104 Id. art. 28.6.
105 Id. art. 28.4.
106 For instance, since 1997 the percentage share of the state budget allocated to the
      court budget ranged from approximately 0.39 to 0.48 percent. Дамдинсүрэн
      Солонго [DAMDINSUREN SOLONGO], Шүүхийн захиргааны талаарх судалгааны
      тойм [THE OVERVIEW OF THE RESEARCH OF JUDICIAL ADMINISTRATION] (Open
      Society Forum, 2014) 4-5.
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia              193


                                                              107
0.85 percent in 2014, and 0.82 percent in 2015 respectively.

     Therefore, the positive dynamics of reforms to the system of
financing the court are apparent at present; however, additional funding
is required.



IV. Development of the Administrative Review in
    Mongolia

     “Mongolia’s Strategic Plan for Justice Sector Reform”, which was
developed with the assistance of the US Agency for International
Development (USAID), defined one of the objectives of judicial
independence as “to create an oversight mechanism for illegal decisions
of the executive power”. A proper system of administrative justice
represents an essential element of good governance. Therefore,
establishment of the specialized administrative courts in order to perform
an effective check on the arbitrary exercise of power by government was
a necessary and important step in advancing judicial reform. Also the
system of administrative justice is exceptionally important in countries
with an authoritarian past, where the traditional approach in relations
between the state and citizens is based on “power and subordination”
principles.

     In this Part, the need for administrative review and the creation of
an administrative court system will be discussed in detail.

     During the previous system, the doctrine of separation of powers


107 See THE JUDICIAL GENERAL COUNCIL OF MONGOLIA, JUDICIAL GENERAL COUNCIL OF
    MONGOLIA COURT STATISTICAL REPORT (2015).
194                                  《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


was not accepted in Mongolia, which resulted in the lack of
administrative justice. Courts usually refused to review administrative
acts. Ordinary courts, in reviewing criminal and civil cases, had mere
rights to “demand” and “assert” to rectify any failures by the middle-
and lower-level administrative organizations and officials if they
considered that such failures in their actions had impacted the outcome
of particular cases or disputes. These rights were weak in terms of their
influence. At the same time, the provisions allowing for the courts to
utilize these rights “if necessary” made them rather discretionary.
Therefore, it is inadequate to consider such ordinary rights of the courts
to issue decisions as conducting effective oversight over the activities of
administrative organs. Also the range of issues subject to decision by the
judiciary was very narrow; only a handful of arbitrary actions could be
contested in a court. There was no comprehensive complaints system to
restore rights violated by state administrative bodies and public officials.
Most complaints were directed to the procuracy, the administrative
agency charged with enforcing legality in public administration.

      After the adoption of a new, democratic Constitution, Mongolia
began to build a modern democratic society based on a market economy.
There came an awareness that empowerment of courts to hold public
officials accountable for their decision-making through the application
of fair procedural rules and the use of appeal processes and judicial
review is important in aligning relationships between the state, market,
and civil society. For example, administrative justice would provide
necessary safeguards against illegal interference of governmental
agencies into the activities of legal entities. Furthermore, it certainly will
have positive impact on easing the registration, permission, and licensing
procedures of governmental agencies. This is why the establishment of
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia                          195


administrative courts in countries in transition to democracy is
considered a cornerstone of judicial reform, and Mongolia is far from an
exception.

      The State Great Hural of Mongolia adopted in 1990 the Law “On
Review of Allegedly Illegal Acts of Administrative Bodies and Officials
                    108
by the Courts”,           which allowed courts to exercise judicial review of
both “collegial and individual acts”. Under the Law, judges had sole
authority over those actions and decisions of any executive, state, or
governmental agency or representative, which may have violated
                  109
citizens’ rights.         In addition, the Supreme Court of Mongolia issued in
1991 the Resolution “On the Correct Application of some Provisions of
the Law ‘On Review of Allegedly Illegal Acts of Administrative Bodies
                                    110
and Officials by the Courts’”.

      However, despite the existence of some forms of judicial control
over government actions, a large loophole was still prevalent in the
scope of judicial control and its influencing capacity, especially over the
legislative actions and those of the high administrative body. Attempts to
eliminate this loophole were initiated in 1990. Provision 27 of the 1998
Legal Reform Program provides for the enabling legal climate to launch
the operations of the specialized court in Mongolia. The period from
1998-2000 marked the initial stage of drafting the Law on

108 Захиргааны байгууллага, албан тушаалтны хууль бус шийдвэрийг шүүхээр
    хянах журмын тухай хууль [The Law on Review of Allegedly Illegal Acts of
    Administrative Bodies and Officials by the Courts], in 2 Бүгд Найрамдах Монгол
    Ард Улсын хууль, зарлиг, тогтоолын эмхтгэл [BUNDLES OF LAWS, DECREES AND
    RESOLUTIONS OF THE MONGOLIAN PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC] 103-106 (1990) (Mong.).
109 Id. at 104-105.
110 The Supreme Court of Mongolia is empowered to issue the official interpretations
    for correct applications of all laws, except for the Constitution. See CONSTITUTION OF
    MONGOLIA, supra note 37, art. 50.
196                                       《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


Administrative Courts, which saw active involvement from the Supreme
Court of Mongolia, the Secretariat of the State Great Hural and the
Ministry of Justice, as well as rigorous support from the Hanns Seidel
Foundation of Germany through its resident representative office in
Mongolia.

       The second stage of drafting the law continued from 2000 until
2003. Based on the rationale of the “Strategic Plan for Justice Sector
            111
Reform”,          several provisions were included such as to establish
specialized courts for resolution of administrative cases, and to become
acquainted with other countries’ law on administrative and other
specialized courts and their activities.

       As a result of implementing these measures, a system of specialized
administrative courts was created, along with the Constitutional Tsets
(Court) of Mongolia. The creation of administrative courts was based on
the Constitution of Mongolia (Article 48 (1), which provides that
specialized courts may be established, if such necessity arises. On
December 26, 2002, the State Great Hural passed the Law on the
                                                 112
Establishment of Administrative Courts                 along with the Law on the
                                              113
Procedure for Administrative Cases.                 These laws became effective
from 1 June, 2004. With the establishment of administrative courts,
citizens were able to access these courts to make a complaint about


111 See The Resolution of the State Great Hural on the Adoption of the Judicial Strategic
      Plan of Mongolia, supra note 54.
112 Захиргааны шүүх байгуулах тухай хууль [The Law on the Establishment of the of
    Administrative Courts], in 3 Төрийн мэдээлэл [THE STATE BULLETIN] 74 (2003)
    (Mong.).
113 Захиргааны хэрэг хянан шийдвэрлэх тухай хууль [Тhe Law on Procedure for
    Administrative Cases], in 3 Төрийн мэдээлэл [THE STATE BULLETIN] 54 (2003)
    (Mong.).
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia                            197


illegal decisions by state bodies, which were kept in the shadows
previously. The administrative courts started to annul such decisions and
put a stop to illegal actions.

      It should be noted that since Mongolia belongs to the civil law
family, it adopted all of its major characteristics. Thus, Mongolia created
a system of special administrative courts because it considered it
inappropriate for the courts of general jurisdiction to review the acts of
                 114
the executive.         The need to create a whole network of administrative
courts was explained by the sharp growth of cases connected with
complaints about the actions of government officials.

      The current system of administrative courts includes courts of first
instance, an appellate court, and the court of last resort. This was not
always a case. At first, the system of administrative courts in Mongolia
operated without an intermediate appellate court. There are 21 provincial
administrative courts, including the capital city administrative court,
acting as courts of first instance. The decisions of the provincial
administrative courts were appealed directly to the Chamber for
Administrative Cases of the Supreme Court, which acted as both
intermediate appellate court and court of last resort for administrative



114 This is a typical way for civil law countries to set up separate administrative courts.
    The reason for this is the doctrine of separation of powers, according to which the
    branches of government should be separate from each other. The separation of the
    administrative and judicial powers denied judges of ordinary courts any opportunity
    to intervene in the administrative process. Therefore, administrative review is
    performed by the courts with special jurisdiction, i.e., administrative courts. Usually,
    these are not linked to the ordinary judiciary. Ordinary judges may not rule on the
    legality of governmental decisions, because to give them a power to annul acts of
    government would result in an encroachment on the executive power. MERRYMAN &
    PÉREZ-PERDOMO, supra note 6, at 88-89, 134-35; HERBERT JACOB ET AL., COURTS,
    LAWS AND POLITICS IN COMPARATIVE PERSPECTIVE 185-88 (1996).
198                                       《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


cases. Only seven years after Mongolia established its first specialized
court for administrative cases, the decision was made to complete the
country’s administrative court system by establishing the intermediate
appellate court. On April 1, 2011, the Administrative Court of
Appeals began        operating     in   Ulaanbaatar.       So    from     2011,     the
administrative court system of Mongolia include three instance courts:
20 first-instance administrative courts, the administrative appeals court
and the Chamber for Administrative Cases of the Supreme Court of
Mongolia, employing approximately 80 judges and over 90 court
                           115
administrative officers.

      Another significant feature of the administrative courts is that they
are organized differently from an ordinary court system. The notable
distinction of the system of administrative courts from that of the
ordinary court system is the absence of administrative courts in sums
               116
and districts,       while every province (aimag) and the capital city has its
administrative court. These administrative courts deal with disputes
between public officials and citizens or legal persons arising from the
exercise of public authority.

      The intermediate appellate panel decides cases with a panel of three
justices and is not limited to considering the issues stated in appeal but
instead has to review the whole case. As a last instance court, the
Chamber for Administrative Cases hears the case with a panel of five
justices. Moreover, if the case has been heard by the Chamber prior to


115 See Judiciary and Judicial Administration, THE JUDICIAL GENERAL COUNCIL OF
    MONGOLIA, http://eng.judcouncil.mn/administration.html (last visited July 15, 2017).
    These numbers does not include 6 justices—members of the Administrative
    Chamber of the Supreme Court of Mongolia.
116 Lower territorial and administrative units in Mongolia.
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia                          199


this later hearing, the justices who took part in the first hearing must
exclude themselves.

     The Law of Mongolia on the Procedure for Administrative Cases
entered into force on June 1, 2004. This Law regulates functioning of the
administrative      courts;     jurisdiction      and      competencies        of     the
administrative courts; principles and procedures of trials, parties in the
process, and other persons involved; administrative court decisions and
their execution. The goal of the administrative courts as a legal
institution is to counteract the abuses and excesses of power of the
public authorities, defend people’s rights under the law, and to ensure the
legal order. The only target of this court procedure is “administrative acts
                                                          117
or actions” and their validity and legitimacy.                  Any disputes which
arise from an administrative act and which may affect a person’s rights
may be challenged before these courts.

     The main power of the administrative courts is to exercise court
control of activities of the executive organizations within a legally
defined scope and power. According to the law, administrative courts are
to process all cases protesting the actions of officials, and their legal acts.
Article 4 of the Law on the Procedure for Administrative Cases provides
the broad jurisdiction for administrative courts by defining the


117 Article 3.1.4 of the Law of Mongolia on Procedure for Administrative Cases
    provides the following definition: “An administrative act is a single compelling order
    or commanding action with direct legal outcome that was issued or acted by an
    administrative authority or official in oral or written form, for the purposes of
    regulating a particular incident caused in the public legal arena.” Hence, the most
    common type of acts that are likely to be issues in administrative cases would be, but
    are not limited to, all kinds of government licensing, tax orders, land-related
    regulations, and government procurement. See Захиргааны хэрэг хянан
    шийдвэрлэх тухай хууль [Тhe Law on Procedure for Administrative Cases], in 3
    Төрийн мэдээлэл [THE STATE BULLETIN] 54 (2003) (Mong.).
200                                  《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


administrative agencies and officials whose acts are subject to judicial
control. All areas of public life such as the police, school regulations,
roads, and civil service are covered. Administrative courts do not
examine disputes that are related to the normative acts that, according to
the Constitution, are in the competence of the Constitutional Tsets; and
also disputes examination of which, according to the legislation, are in
the jurisdiction of another court.

      In matters before the administrative courts, the defendant must
always be a public administration authority; this includes not only the
executive branch of government but also the administration of public
schools, hospitals, and even energy providers. The plaintiff must always
be a citizen or legal entity.

      The Law on the Procedure for Administrative Cases is divided into
two sections: the first contains the procedure for administrative tribunals
and higher administrative officials to pre-decide the original act based on
a complaint submitted by a citizen or legal entity, and the second is the
procedure for administrative courts. Pre-hearing by the administrative
tribunals before commencing action in the courts is an important step.
Any person who considers his or her legally acknowledged rights to
have been violated by an administrative act or action can submit a
preliminary petition to a hierarchically superior official or administrative
tribunal. There is a 30-day “statute of limitation” period within which an
aggrieved individual must submit a preliminary petition to the
administrative tribunal. If the petitioner is not satisfied with the answer
on their preliminary petition or does not receive any answer under the
terms established by law, he or she is entitled to submit a complaint to
the administrative court.
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia            201


     Trials are held in public. While administrative courts do not look
into the reasonableness, suitability, or purpose of the administrative act,
they may perform substantive review (of whether it has a sufficient legal
basis) or procedural review (on whether procedures imposed by law
have been observed by the administrative agency). All evidence must be
presented and examined at the hearing. Judges must base their decision
on the evidence properly gathered in the case and presented. If non-
compliance with the law is found, the administrative act in question is
invalidated. A summary of judgment is announced at the end of the
hearing.

     All appeals are considered by three (intermediate appellate panel)
or five judges, who receive the complete file from the lower court and
base their decision on it. Judgments that are not voluntarily executed are
implemented for the winning party by the court bailiffs.

     Therefore, the institutional design of administrative courts looks
quite good.

     The establishment of administrative courts signifies marked
progress in the improvement of the national judicial system as well as
the increased awareness that the country is placing due emphasis on
protecting individual rights against unlawful governmental action.

     Since 2004, Mongolian administrative courts have begun to play an
important role in protecting and securing human rights. They review the
legality of both administrative acts and inaction in a growing number of
cases and in broadening areas of social regulation. Between 2004 and
2016, the number of cases in which citizens sued the state rose from 145
to 1780 (see Table 1).
202                                        《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）



             Table 1. Judicial Review of Administrative Acts
#     Year      Number of cases Decrease or increase in Percentage of decrease
                                  number of lawsuits      or increase in cases
1       2004            145                      -                           -
2       2005            386                     241                     +165.5
3       2006            431                      45                       +11.7
4       2007            591                     160                       +37.1
5       2008            826                     235                       +39.7
6       2009           1074                     248                       +30.0
7       2010           1031                     -43                          -4.0
8       2011            891                    -140                       -13.6
9       2012            961                      70                        +7.9
10      2013           1106                     145                        15.1
11      2014           1187                       81                             7.3
12      2015           1439                     252                        21.2
13      2016           1780                     341                        23.7
                                                                           118
Source: The 2004-2016 Reports of the Activities of the Courts of Mongolia.




118 Монгол Улсын Дээд Шүүх [The Supreme Court of Mongolia], Монгол Улсын
      шүүхийн 2004 оны шүүн таслах ажиллагааны нэгдсэн дүн мэдээ [The 2004
      Report on the Activities of the Courts of Mongolia], at 7 (2004), http://www.
      supremecourt.mn/uploads/files/5577d849136f_2004shuuhtaslah.pdf; Монгол Улсын
      Дээд Шүүх [The Supreme Court of Mongolia], Монгол Улсын шүүхийн 2005 оны
      шүүн таслах ажиллагааны нэгдсэн дүн мэдээ [The 2005 Report on the Activities
      of the Courts of Mongolia], at 7 (2005), http://www.supremecourt.mn/uploads/files/
      557fe12bdb3f6_shuuntaslah2005.pdf; Монгол Улсын Дээд Шүүх [The Supreme
      Court of Mongolia], Монгол Улсын шүүхийн 2006 оны шүүн таслах
      ажиллагааны нэгдсэн дүн мэдээ [The 2006 Report on the Activities of the Courts of
      Mongolia], at 7 (2006), http://www.supremecourt.mn/uploads/files/558036a05bc35_
      taniltsuulga2006.pdf; Монгол Улсын Дээд Шүүх [The Supreme Court of
      Mongolia], Монгол Улсын шүүхийн 2007 оны шүүн таслах ажиллагааны
      нэгдсэн дүн мэдээ [The 2007 Report on the Activities of the Courts of Mongolia], at
      7 (2007), http://www.supremecourt.mn/uploads/files/55813bac4da99_taniltsuulga2007.
      pdf; Монгол Улсын Дээд Шүүх [The Supreme Court of Mongolia], Монгол Улсын
      шүүхийн 2008 оны шүүн таслах ажиллагааны нэгдсэн дүн мэдээ [The 2008
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia                          203


     In the period between 2004 and 2015, a total of 19,683 cases were
received by all instances of administrative courts, out of which 12,767
cases were resolved including 7,441 cases decided at the first instance
administrative courts, 3,519 cases were resolved at the administrative
appeals court, and 1,807 cases were finalized at the Supreme Court. A
review of administrative cases resolved for the past decade by the
administrative courts reveals that the number of petitions as well as the



    Report on the Activities of the Courts of Mongolia], at 7 (2008), http://www.
    supremecourt.mn/uploads/files/558032c3aac2e_taniltsuulga2008.pdf; Монгол Улсын
    Дээд Шүүх [The Supreme Court of Mongolia], Монгол Улсын шүүхийн 2009 оны
    шүүн таслах ажиллагааны нэгдсэн дүн мэдээ [The 2009 Report on the Activities
    of the Courts of Mongolia], at 8 (2009), http://www.supremecourt.mn/uploads/files/
    558035c64da1b_taniltsuulga2009.pdf; Монгол Улсын Дээд Шүүх [The Supreme
    Court of Mongolia], Монгол Улсын шүүхийн 2010 оны шүүн таслах
    ажиллагааны нэгдсэн дүн мэдээ [The 2010 Report on the Activities of the Courts of
    Mongolia], at 8 (2010), http://www.supremecourt.mn/uploads/files/5581331fa8660_
    taniltsuulga2010.pdf; Монгол Улсын Дээд Шүүх [The Supreme Court of Mongolia],
    Монгол Улсын шүүхийн 2011 оны шүүн таслах ажиллагааны нэгдсэн дүн
    мэдээ [The 2011 Report on the Activities of the Courts of Mongolia], at 9 (2011),
    http://www.supremecourt.mn/uploads/files/557ff452b0544_taniltsuulga2011.pdf;
    Монгол Улсын Дээд Шүүх [The Supreme Court of Mongolia], Монгол Улсын
    шүүхийн 2012 оны шүүн таслах ажиллагааны нэгдсэн дүн мэдээ [The 2012
    Report on the Activities of the Courts of Mongolia], at 9 (2012), http://www.
    supremecourt.mn/uploads/files/558016f4bd544_taniltsuulga2012.pdf;          Шүүхийн
    Ерөнхий Зөвлөл [The Judicial General Council], Монгол Улсын шүүхийн 2013
    оны шүүн таслах ажиллагааны нэгдсэн дүн мэдээ [The 2013 Report on the
    Activities of the Courts of Mongolia], at 32 (2013), http://www.judinstitute.mn/
    stastistic_report/137--2013-.html; Шүүхийн Ерөнхий Зөвлөл [The Judicial General
    Council], Монгол Улсын шүүхийн 2014 оны шүүн таслах ажиллагааны нэгдсэн
    дүн мэдээ [The 2014 Report on the Activities of the Courts of Mongolia], at 30 (2014),
    http://www.judinstitute.mn/stastistic_report/141--2014-.html; Шүүхийн Ерөнхий
    Зөвлөл [The Judicial General Council], Монгол Улсын шүүхийн 2015 оны шүүн
    таслах ажиллагааны нэгдсэн дүн мэдээ [The 2015 Report on the Activities of the
    Courts of Mongolia], at 198 (2015), http://www.judinstitute.mn/stastistic_report/145-
    -2015-.html; Шүүхийн Ерөнхий Зөвлөл [The Judicial General Council], Монгол
    Улсын шүүхийн 2016 оны шүүн таслах ажиллагааны нэгдсэн дүн мэдээ [The
    2016 Report on the Activities of the Courts of Mongolia], at 44 (2016), http://www.
    judinstitute.mn/stastistic_report/161--2016-.html.
204                                        《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


administrative cases resolved has been constantly increasing on an
annual basis. This trend is expected to continue in the future.

       Remarkably, between 2005 and 2016, approximately 60 percent of
the total number of cases resolved by administrative courts were
                                                            119
resolved in favor of citizens and legal persons.                  This means that the
illegal decisions by about 4,000 state administrative bodies and public
officials were annulled, restoring the citizens’ as well as legal persons’
legitimate rights and interests. The number of cases decided in favor of
plaintiffs has slightly decreased in recent years but still remains very
high.

        Table 2. Percentage of lawsuits in favor of petitioners
                            (2013-2016)
                               2013     2014     2015     2016     Three years’ average
Percentage of lawsuits
  decided fully in favor        49.9    47.30     51.2     49.4           49.45
  of plaintiffs
Percentage of lawsuits
  decided partially in           9.0    10.36      9.3     11.2            9.9
  favor of plaintiffs
Total number of lawsuits
  decided in favor of
                                58.9    57.66     60.5     60.6           59.4
  plaintiffs (whether fully
  or in part)
Source: The yearly (2013, 2014, 2015 and 2016) Reports of the Activities of the Courts
                      120
         of Mongolia.




119 For the appellate court and the Administrative Chamber of the Supreme Court, these
      numbers are slightly lower: 57.3 and 55.7% respectively.
120 Шүүхийн Ерөнхий Зөвлөл [The Judicial General Council], Монгол Улсын
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia                          205


     Citizens made claims against the state on a wide range of issues
involving the use of land and natural resources, the imposition of taxes,
the holding of elections, and so on.

Table 3. Kinds of disputes resolved by the administrative courts
                         (2012-2016)
#   Kind of dispute      2012 2013 2014 2015 2016                Number      Percentage
                                                                 of cases
1   Land dispute          210     280     386     338     419      1633          25.22
2   Civil service
                          133     203     297     400     417      1450          22.40
      dispute
3   Election dispute      120     103       14     -      184       421           6.50
4   Natural resources
                          119       72      43     96     142       472           7.29
      dispute
5   Tax dispute            73       65      81    128     127       474           7.32
6   Proprietary rights
                           80       88      59    104      83       414           6.39
      dispute
7   Registration of
                           -       -        12      14     -          26          0.40
      entities dispute
8   Registration of
                           -        13      28      16     30         87          1.30
      citizens dispute


    шүүхийн 2013 оны шүүн таслах ажиллагааны нэгдсэн дүн мэдээ [The 2013
    Report on the Activities of the Courts of Mongolia], at 34 (2013), http://www.
    judinstitute.mn/stastistic_report/137--2013-.html; Шүүхийн Ерөнхий Зөвлөл [The
    Judicial General Council], Монгол Улсын шүүхийн 2014 оны шүүн таслах
    ажиллагааны нэгдсэн дүн мэдээ [The 2014 Report on the Activities of the Courts of
    Mongolia], at 32-33 (2014), http://www.judinstitute.mn/staStistic_report/141--2014-
    .html; Шүүхийн Ерөнхий Зөвлөл [The Judicial General Council], Монгол Улсын
    шүүхийн 2015 оны шүүн таслах ажиллагааны нэгдсэн дүн мэдээ [The 2015
    Report on the Activities of the Courts of Mongolia], at 199 (2015), http://www.
    judinstitute.mn/stastistic_report/145--2015-.html; Шүүхийн Ерөнхий Зөвлөл [The
    Judicial General Council], Монгол Улсын шүүхийн 2016 оны шүүн таслах
    ажиллагааны нэгдсэн дүн мэдээ [The 2016 Report on the Activities of the Courts of
    Mongolia], at 46 (2016), http://www.judinstitute.mn/stastistic_report/161--2016-.html.
206                                        《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


9     Dispute against
        decision of
                             42      46      81     83      75       327          5.13
        controlling
        organs
10 Tender dispute            -       -       40     55      -         95          1.46
11 Other                   184      236    146     205     303      1074         16.59
12 Total                   961     1106 1187 1439 1780              6473        100.00
Source: The yearly (2012, 2013, 2014, 2015 and 2016) Reports of the Activities of the
                             121
         Courts of Mongolia.

       During this period, the majority of cases were related to land
disputes, which made up about 30 percent of all administrative cases.
Approximately 20 percent of all disputes were related to civil service,
while most other common disputes were related to elections, property
registration, mineral licenses and tender-related disputes. Generally,
these types of relations were arisen most commonly between the state
bodies and citizens. Consequently, the majority of disputes also were
arisen in these administrative areas.

       Therefore, administrative courts now play an active role in


121 Монгол Улсын Дээд Шүүх [The Supreme Court of Mongolia], Монгол Улсын
      шүүхийн 2012 оны шүүн таслах ажиллагааны нэгдсэн дүн мэдээ [The 2012
      Report on the Activities of the Courts of Mongolia], at 10 (2012), www.supremecourt.
      mn/uploads/files/558016f4bd544_taniltsuulga2012.pdf; Шүүхийн Ерөнхий Зөвлөл
      [The Judicial General Council], Монгол Улсын шүүхийн 2013 оны шүүн таслах
      ажиллагааны нэгдсэн дүн мэдээ [The 2013 Report on the Activities of the Courts of
      Mongolia], at 34-35 (2013), http://www.judinstitute.mn/stastistic_report/137--2013-
      .html; Шүүхийн Ерөнхий Зөвлөл [The Judicial General Council], Монгол Улсын
      шүүхийн 2014 оны шүүн таслах ажиллагааны нэгдсэн дүн мэдээ [The 2014
      Report on the Activities of the Courts of Mongolia], at 33-34 (2014), http://www.
      judinstitute.mn/stastistic_report/141--2014-.html; Шүүхийн Ерөнхий Зөвлөл [The
      Judicial General Council], Монгол Улсын шүүхийн 2015 оны шүүн таслах
      ажиллагааны нэгдсэн дүн мэдээ [The 2015 Report on the Activities of the Courts of
      Mongolia], at 200 (2015), http://www.judinstitute.mn/stastistic_report/145--2015-
      .html.
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia                                 207


                                                         122
safeguarding fundamental rights and freedoms.

        In the next diagram, the kind of public authorities being
respondents to the lawsuits are shown. As can be seen, the local
governors are the most frequently named respondents.

  600

  500

  400                                                             Governors of all levels
                                                                  State agencies
  300                                                             Local councils
                                                                  Local agencies
  200
                                                                  State controlling organs

  100

    0
              2013             2014            2015



                     Diagram 1. The kind of respondents
Source: The yearly (2013, 2014 and 2015) Reports of the Activities of the Courts of
                     123
         Mongolia.




122 In one example of an action involving judicial review of administrative action in
    2005, an application for a mining license by a mining company was discussed at a
    local Hural (local council) of a sum (rural district or a governmental sub-division of
    Mongolia with administrative powers) and most of those present were opposed to the
    application. However, the Presidium (executive head of the sum) approved the
    application, and the mining company obtained a license from the central government.
    Despite protests from leaders of the Hural, the Presidium issued a decision that the
    company had the right to proceed under its license. The leaders of
    the Hural subsequently appealed to the Arkhangai Province Administrative Court.
    The court held that the Presidium had no authority to overrule the decision of the
    Hural; that the mining company’s license was invalid; and that if the river were
    damaged by mining activities, the families in the valley would not be able to sustain
    their herds and would have to move to the city; and it called for more transparency in
    licensing procedures by the sum executive. Decision of the Administrative Court,
    Arkhangai Province, No. 4 (May 2, 2005) (Mong.).
123 Шүүхийн Ерөнхий Зөвлөл [The Judicial General Council], Монгол Улсын
208                                      《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


       Administrative courts play an important role in the formation of a
culture in which state bodies function in accordance with law. State
administrative bodies and public officials, like citizens, are also required
to comply with law in their actions. Resolution of disputes at the
administrative courts enables citizens to appreciate that they do enjoy
equal rights with state officials. In the past, citizens were afraid of state
administrative bodies and public officials, and thus accepted and
complied with administrative decisions. Now this attitude is changing,
with many more people accessing administrative courts. Citizens are
cultivating an attitude for asserting their rights. Citizens are also starting
to learn about the law and recognize illegal decisions. This is a great
progress in citizens’ legal knowledge and awareness.

       The establishment of administrative courts also had a positive
impact      on    curbing    corruption.     Previously,    without     access    to
administrative courts, citizens had no other recourse than to bribe public
officials in order to resolve a particular administrative issue. However,
with the establishment of administrative courts, citizens now have the
option to apply to administrative courts for resolution of certain issues.

       Through administrative court actions, the rule of law in Mongolia
will be strengthened.


      шүүхийн 2013 оны шүүн таслах ажиллагааны нэгдсэн дүн мэдээ [The 2013
      Report on the Activities of the Courts of Mongolia], at 35 (2013),
      http://www.judinstitute.mn/stastistic_report/137--2013-.html; Шүүхийн Ерөнхий
      Зөвлөл [The Judicial General Council], Монгол Улсын шүүхийн 2014 оны шүүн
      таслах ажиллагааны нэгдсэн дүн мэдээ [The 2014 Report on the Activities of the
      Courts       of    Mongolia],    at 34-35 (2014), http://www.judinstitute.mn/
      stastistic_report/141--2014-.html; Шүүхийн Ерөнхий Зөвлөл [The Judicial General
      Council], Монгол Улсын шүүхийн 2015 оны шүүн таслах ажиллагааны нэгдсэн
      дүн мэдээ [The 2015 Report on the Activities of the Courts of Mongolia], at 201
      (2015), http://www.judinstitute.mn/stastistic_report/145--2015-.html.
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia                     209


     Despite such positive development, a good deal of criticism has
arisen over the role of administrative courts in Mongolia in judicial
review. First, despite there having statistically been an apparent boom in
judicial review of administrative action, the actual level of
administrative justice in Mongolia is still low. One reason for this may
be an ongoing lack of knowledge on the part of many citizens about the
opportunity to bring to court complaints against officials. Secondly, there
is the concern of jurisdictional overlap with the Constitutional Tsets.
After the capital city administrative court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs
                         124
in two landmark cases,         the decisions provoked some conflict between
the administrative courts and the Constitutional Tsets in relation to acts
by the General Election Committee, and constitutional challenges to the
validity of laws. Consequently, the Constitutional Tsets invalidated some
articles of the Law on the Procedure for Administrative Cases on the
grounds of their incompatibility with the Constitution.

     The Constitutional Tsets’s Case

     ● A request was made to the Constitutional Tsets to invalidate
       Articles 4.1.1 and 4.1.6 of the Law on the Procedure for
       Administrative Cases on the grounds of their incompatibility with
       the Constitution. Articles 4.1.1 and 4.16 of the Law on the
       Procedure for Administrative Cases provide that the Government
       of Mongolia and the General Election Committee are under the
       jurisdiction of the administrative court. More particularly, Article
       4.1.1 provides that disputes concerning illegal acts made by the



124 See Erdenebat & Erdenebaatar v. Government of Mongolia, Capital City
    Administrative Court, 2005 (Mong.); another case is Enkhbold v. General Election
    Committee, Capital City Administrative Court, 2004 (Mong.).
210                                 《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


        Governmental Cabinet of Mongolia shall be decided and
        invalidated as provided by Article 8.1.2 of the Law on the
        Procedure for Administrative Cases by the Administrative Court;

      ● Article 4.1.6 provides that decisions made by the General
        Election Committee shall be considered to be an administrative
        act that can be validated by the Administrative Court in
        accordance with Article 8.1.2 of the Law on the Procedure for
        Administrative Cases.

      The request to the Constitutional Tsets argued that:

      ● Article 4.1.1 was in conflict with Articles 38.1 and 45.2 of the
        Constitution; and Article 4.1.6 was in conflict with subparagraph
        2 of paragraph 2 of Article 66 of the Constitution. The
        Constitutional Tsets of Mongolia found that clause “4.1.1 The
        Government Cabinet of Mongolia” of Article 4.1 of the Law on
        the Procedure for Administrative Cases was in breach of Articles
        38.1 and 45.2 of the Constitution, and therefore unconstitutional.
        The ground for the decision is as follows: Article 38.1 of the
        Constitution states that “the Government is the highest executive
        body of the State,” and Article 45.2 of the Constitution states that
        “If Government resolutions and ordinances are incompatible with
        laws and regulations, the Government itself or the State Great
        Hural shall invalidate them.” Therefore, the competent body to
        invalidate decisions by the Government which are incompatible
        with laws is the highest executive body of the State. The
        adjudication on constitutionality is open for procedure in the case
        of non-compliance with responsibilities by the State Great Hural
        and the Government, as provided in the Constitution. The
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia            211


       competence to review the acts of the highest executive body is
       not provided to the administrative court by the Constitution.
       Consequently legislation stating that Government acts shall be
       reviewed by the administrative court, as adopted by the
       legislature, has been found unconstitutional on the grounds that it
       interferes with the powers of the Government and the State Great
       Hural as stated in the Constitution.

     The Constitutional Tsets of Mongolia also found that clause “4.1.6.
The General Election Committee” of article 4.1 of the Law on the
Procedure for Administrative Cases was in breach of Article 66.2.2 of
the Constitution, and therefore unconstitutional. The General Election
Committee has functions to conduct referendums and elections for
members of the State Great Hural and the President, and to make
decisions regarding exercising the right to elect and to be elected by
citizens. As seen from the Constitutions of different democratic countries,
there is a precedent that this type of dispute shall be subject either to
jurisdiction by the Constitutional Court in countries where a
constitutional court exists, or to the Supreme Court where a
constitutional court does not exist. According to Article 66.2.2 of the
Constitution, “Tsets shall make judgments on the conformity of national
referendums and decisions of the central election authority on the
elections of the State Great Hural and its members, as well as on
presidential elections with the Constitution.” Therefore, the adjudication
on the constitutionality of acts of the General Election Committee shall
be subject to Article 66.2 of the Constitution. However, if disputes
concerning illegal acts made by the General Election Committee are
decided by the administrative court, this is interfering with the
competence of the Constitutional Tsets, as provided by the Constitution.
212                                         《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


       The Constitutional Tsets concluded that:

       The statement in subparagraph 4.1.1 regarding “The
       Governmental Cabinet of Mongolia”, of paragraph 1:
       “Administrative Case Courts shall decide disputes concerning
       illegal acts made by the following bodies and officials,” and of
       Article 4: “Disputes under Jurisdiction of Administrative Case
       Courts of Law on the Procedure for Administrative Cases, is
       found unconstitutional on the basis of a breach of Article 38.1,”
       which states that “the Government is the highest executive
       body of the State”, Article 45.2, which states that “if the
       resolutions and ordinances are incompatible with laws and
       regulations, the Government itself or the State Great Hural
       shall invalidate them” and also Article 4.1.6 stating “the
       General Election Committee” is found unconstitutional on the
       basis of a breach of Article 66.2.2, which states that “Tsets shall
       make judgments on the conformity of national referendums and
       decisions of the central election authority on the elections of
       the State Great Hural and its members, as well as on
       presidential elections with the Constitution.”

       Also, the level of discretion of an administrative judge has attracted
some attention. It should be noted that the civil law tradition of judicial
independence is characterized by a doctrinal approach, which generally
                                  125
limits the role of a judge.             Politics play a minor role in the judicial


125 The judiciary is subject to a long training process. The career is attractive to those
      with limited ambition. The initial choice of a legal career tends to be final, and the
      resulting sharp separation of each branch of the legal profession from each other
      precludes young lawyers from deciding wisely which is best for them. They get only
      minor judicial positions early in their careers, progressing to more important offices
      as they acquire experience.
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia              213


selection, as the primary importance is laid on the professional
qualifications. They enter at the bottom and advance according to senior-
              126
ity and merit.

     The question of administrative action in the civil law family is thus
exclusively a question of legality, not reason. As a result, many specific
principles, concepts and doctrines like the principle of proportionality,
reasonableness, balance, and so forth developed in constitutional,
international, and administrative law are still unfamiliar to Mongolian
judges.



V. Conclusion

     During the socialist period, Mongolian judges did not enjoy any
independence, and were accountable for their actions to the superior
judicial bodies, government officials, and party functionaries. The status
of Mongolian judges was low as well. Some attempts to establish
judicial review of government actions were made during that period;
however, they were destined to fail because the socialist legal doctrine
did not recognize the principle of separation of powers. Only after the
collapse of the Soviet Union and disintegration of the socialist system
did Mongolia adopt a new democratic Constitution and initiate a long
process of judicial reform. Indeed, the socialist legacy has made it
difficult to establish an independent and respected judiciary in Mongolia.
Nevertheless, despite the considerable barriers to the creation of an


126 MARY ANN GLENDON ET AL., COMPARATIVE LEGAL TRADITIONS 86 (2008); GRAHAM
    HASSAL & CHERYL SAUNDERS, ASIA-PACIFIC CONSTITUTIONAL SYSTEMS 183 (2002);
    MCHUGH, supra note 11, at 19.
214                                 《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）


independent judiciary, significant progress in improving the justice
system in Mongolia has been made over the past twenty years. Currently
the Mongolian judiciary is constitutionally independent from the other
branches of government. Judicial disciplinary mechanisms have been
established and are working. Management of the judiciary is much
improved from what it was in the past. The courts now control their own
budget process through the Judicial General Council.

      One outcome of judicial reform was the expansion of court
jurisdiction to embrace a judicial review of government actions. Being a
country with a civil law tradition, Mongolia has established a separate
system of administrative courts. The process of establishing a system of
administrative courts in Mongolia followed a long and difficult path.

      Establishment of the administrative court resulted in the following
advantages:

      1. A new and powerful mechanism to protect human rights was
        created. This expanded the legal guarantees towards the provision
        of human rights.
      2. A new instrument was created to limit and address corruption,
        bureaucracy and red tape, which were still persistent within the
        public administration.
      3. A flexible approach and new legal culture were introduced into
        the relations between administrative bodies and government
        officials, on the one hand, and citizens, on the other hand, and the
        democratic principles of government actions were strengthened.
      4. By placing government actions under the purview of judicial
        control, a condition is being created to make the weaker judicial
        power equal to that of other state powers such as legislative and
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia         215


       executive powers.
     5. Administrative review is especially important in a country
       moving from a planned economy to market economy by
       providing safeguards against illegal interference of governmental
       agencies into the activities of legal entities.

     Yet the reality of judicial independence leaves much to be desired.
Despite the fact that Mongolia has made significant strides in
strengthening the judicial independence and impartiality of judges
through legislation consistent with global standards, these legal
provisions are not adequately            enforced. Thus, despite   many
improvements in the justice system of Mongolia realized over the past
two decades, much still remains to be done.
216                                《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）




                              Reference

1. English

Astrada, Sebastian R. 2010. Exporting the Rule of Law to Mongolia:
      Post-Socialist Legal and Judicial Reforms. Denver Journal
      International Law and Policy 38:461-525.
Burbank, Stephen B. 1996. The Past and Present of Judicial
      Independence. Judicature 80:117-122.
Cappelletti, Mauro. 1991. The Judicial Process in Comparative
      Perspective. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Dhavan, Rajeev. 1985. Judges and Accountability. Pp. 165-182 in
      Judging and the Judicial Power, edited by Dhavan R., R.
      Sudarshan, and S. Khurshid. London: Sweet & Maxwell.
Ginsburg, T., and Chimid Enkhbaatar, eds. 2015. The Role of the
      Constitution of Mongolia in Consolidating Democracy: An Analysis.
      Ulanbaatar: Munkhiin Useg.
Glendon, Mary Ann, Paolo Carozza, and Colin Picker. 2008.
      Comparative Legal Traditions. Eagan, MN: West.
Gramckow, Heike, and Frances Allen. 2011. Justice Sector Reform in
      Mongolia: Looking Back, Looking Forward. Washington, D.C.:
      World Bank.
Hassal, Graham, and Cheryl Saunders. 2006. Asia-Pacific Constitutional
      Systems. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jacob, Herbert, Erhard Blankenburg, Herbert Kritzer, Doris M. Provine,
      and Joseph Sanders. 1996. Courts, Laws and Politics in
      Comparative Perspective. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Karatnycky, Adrian, Alexander J. Motyl, and Boris Shor, eds. 1997.
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia                  217


     Nations in Transit, 1997: Civil Society, Democracy and Markets in
     East Central Europe and the Newly Independent States. Piscataway,
     NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Malleson, Kate. 1999. The New Judiciary: The Effects of Expansion and
     Activism. London: Ashgate.
McHugh, James. 2002. Comparative Constitutional Traditions. New
     York, NY: Peter Lang.
Merryman, John H., and Rogelio Pérez-Perdomo. 2007. The Civil Law
     Tradition. Redwood City, CA: Stanford University Press.
Nemytina, M. V. 2001. Judicial Power in Russia: The Present and the
     Future. Unpublished manuscript. The Law and Society Association,
     Hungary.
Nicholson, Robert D. 1993. Judicial Independence and Accountability:
     Can They Co-exist?. The Australian Law Journal 67:404-426.
Oliver, Dawn, and Gavin Drewry. 1996. Public Service Reforms: Issues
     of Accountability and Public Law. London: Pinter.
Shetreet, Simon J., and Jules Deschenes, eds. 1985. Judicial
     Independence: The Contemporary Debate. Dordrecht: Martinus
     Nijhoff Publishers.
Solomon, Peter, Jr. 2001. Courts in Russia: Independence, Power, and
     Accountability.     Unpublished       manuscript.        Central   European
     University Law School Library, Budapest.
White, Brent T. 2009. Report on the Status of Court Reform in Mongolia.
     Available at http://forum.mn/res_mat/Judicial_Reform_Assessment-
     eng.pdf.
─. 2009. Rotten to the Core: Project Capture and the Failure of
     Judicial Reform in Mongolia. East Asia Law Review 4:209-275.
218                              《中研院法學期刊》第21期（2017年9月）



2. Mongolian

Амарсанаа Ж., Б.Чимид, Р. Мухийт, Л. Төр-Од [Amarsanaa J., B.
      Chimid, R. Muhiit, and L. Tur-Od]. 2010. Монгол Улсын шүүх
      эрх мэдлийн шинэтгэл Улаанбаатар [The Reform of the
      Mongolian Judiciary]. Ulaanbaatar: Admon Publishing House.
Лүндэндорж, Н. [Lundendorj, N.]. 2003. Төр, эрх зүйн сэтгэлгээний
      хөгжил ба чиг хандлага Улаанбаатар [Development of State and
      Legal Thoughts and Its Tendencies]. Ulaanbaatar: Admon
    Publishing House.
Солонго, Дамдинсүрэн [Solongo, Damdinsuren]. 2014. Шүүхийн
    захиргааны талаарх судалгааны тойм Улаанбаатар [The
    Overview of the Research of Judicial Administration]. Ulaanbaatar:
    Open Society Forum.
Хунан, Ж., П. Баттулга, М. Мөнхжаргал [Hunan, J., P. Battulga, and
    М. Munkhjargal]. 2015. Шүүхийн бие даасан, шүүгчийн хараат
    бус байдлын баталгаа: Шүүгчийн томилгоо Улаанбаатар
    [Guarantee of Judicial Independence and Impartiality: Judicial
    Appointment]. Ulaanbaatar: Open Society Forum.
Judicial Independence and Administrative Review in Mongolia   219




             蒙古國司法獨立發展與行政
                訴訟制度的創立


                                                    ＊
                          Enkhbaatar Chimid


                                  摘 要
  在社會主義體制崩潰之後，包括蒙古國在內的前社會主義國
家，均開始民主轉型。由於司法獨立是健全憲政體制的重要基礎之
一，這些國家進行民主發展與鞏固的方向就是建立獨立、公平與有
效率的司法制度。然而這些轉型國家的發展幾乎為人所忽略。本文
的目的有二：首先本文觀察司法獨立的核心概念與它如何適用於蒙
古司法制度，並將追溯蒙古司法制度的歷史背景。接著本文將分析
三階段的司法改革與成果，並將檢驗用以確保蒙古法院獨立的制度
安排，包括許多影響司法獨立的因素，例如制度安排、任期、薪
俸、法院預算、法官懲戒、與任命程序。其次，本文將研究蒙古司
法改革史上首次建立之行政法院制度，以作為司法網絡重要的一部
分。本文論及行政法院的特徵，主要關於管轄權範圍、程序以及工
作負擔。雖然有許多問題仍待解決，但本文認為蒙古司法改革是成
功的。

關鍵詞：司法獨立、司法問責、蒙古法院、蒙古司法改革、蒙古司
    法審查、行政法院制度。




＊ 蒙古國國家治理學院（the Legal Studies Department, National Academy of
   Governance）教授。
