    Article
 Academia Sinica Law Journal
 Issue 22, pp. 203-242 (March 2018)



 Functions of the Proportionality Principle
                                      ＊
    in Japanese Administrative Law
                                                       ＊＊
                           Narufumi Kadomatsu


                                      Abstract
     The proportionality principle (hereafter, the PP) was imported from
Germany into Japan during the interwar period. The Japanese Supreme
Court has never expressly mentioned the PP in its opinion except as
obiter dictum. However, several judgments may have applied the PP in
essence.
     This article questions whether the PP functions “outside” or
“inside” of administrative discretion and whether it performs the
necessity control or the balancing control. It also builds upon the
premise that administrative discretion takes place in the process of the

＊  Submission Date: November 21, 2016; Acceptance Date: June 28, 2017. [Line
   Editor: Wan-Ling Teng, Yu-Wen Chang].
   This paper is based upon the author’s presentation at the 2nd Workshop on
   Comparative Administrative Law in Asia—Proportionality and Democratic
   Accountability (July 8-9, 2013 at Institutum Iurisprudentiae, Academia Sinica,
   Taipei). Based upon the presentation, the author has also published an article in
   Japanese. Narufumi Kadomatsu, Nihon Gyōseihō ni Okeru Hireigensoku no Kinō ni
   Kansuru Oboegaki [Memorandum on the Functions of the Proportionality Principle
   in Japanese Administrative Law], 21(4) SEISAKUKAGAKU 191, 191-200 (2014)（角
   松生史，日本行政法におけ る比例原則の機能に関する覚え書き，政策科
   学，21卷4号， 頁191-200（ 2014年））. The author would like to thank the
   anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments as well as Dr. Steve Pickering
   (Brunel University London) for great editing. This work was supported by JSPS
   KAKENHI Grant Number 15H03290 and 16H03681.
＊＊ Professor, Graduate School of Law, Kobe University, Japan.
   Online: http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/80207181.pdf.
204                                 《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


application of the law in the narrower sense, distinguished from the
interpretation of law and from bare fact-finding, both of which are
reserved for the judges.
     The Supreme Court employs the rhetorical formula of “generally
accepted social ideas” in judicial control of administrative discretion and
has integrated “control of the judgment-making process” into this classic
framework. This essay also examines the relationship between the PP
and its control framework.
     Regarding the necessity control, the purpose-means construction as
the core of the PP is self-evident. As for the balancing control, the
feature of the PP is that a particular interest is placed on one side of the
scale and compared with various other interests. The Supreme Court is
rather reluctant to perform such types of dual balancing, but does so in
certain cases.
     Whether such balancing is appropriate depends upon the
desirability of judicial review, as well as an understanding of the legal
structure in the relevant field. While such dual balancing provides an
effective tool for judicial control, it also presents the risk of making the
actual diversity of interests among various stakeholders invisible.

KEYWORDS: proportionality principle, administrative discretion, control
          of the judgment-making process, Japanese administrative
          law.
Functions of the Proportionality Principle in Japanese Administrative Law   205


                                    Contents

 I. Reception and Understanding of the PP
 II. Judicial Control of Administrative Discretion and the PP
      A. Outside? Inside?
      B. Premises of the Discussion
      C. “Generally Accepted Social Ideas” Control of Discretion
      D. “Control of the Judgment-making Process” Regarding Administrative
         Discretion
 III. Discretion Control and the PP
      A. Outside/Inside and Necessity/Balancing
      B. Cautiousness of the Supreme Court in Setting Priority Rules
      C. Kimigayo Disciplinary Action Case
 IV. Summary




     The doctrine known as the “proportionality principle” (hereafter,
the PP) was imported from Germany into Japanese administrative law
during the interwar period along with a number of other basic concepts
and doctrines. This doctrine is now widely accepted as one of the
“general principles of administrative law”. In this paper, we will first
describe reception of the PP and explore discussions over its legal
foundation and its scope (I.).

     The main area in which the PP has been applied is that of
administrative discretion control. We will analyze whether and how the
principle is applied in this problematic area, and ask whether it limits
discretion from outside or if it will control the rationality of the exercise
of discretion from inside (II. A.). We will first present the premise of the
discussion, namely where we place administrative discretion in the
206                                       《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


logical steps of the application of law (II. B.). We will then observe the
classic “generally accepted social ideas” control of discretion employed
by the Supreme Court (II. C.). We will discuss how the court later
integrated “control of the judgment-making process” into the classic
framework (II. D.).

      We will then return to the question as to whether the PP functions
outside or inside of discretion in Supreme Court judgments, keeping in
mind the above distinction of necessity control and balancing control
(III.). The overall summary follows (IV.).



I. Reception and Understanding of the PP

      The PP was imported from German doctrine into Japanese
jurisprudence before the Second World War, as Tatsukichi Minobe, a
leading figure of pre-war constitutional and administrative law, explores.
He argues that Articles 22 et seq. of the Constitution of the Empire of
                               1
Japan (Meiji Constitution ), which guarantee liberties and safety of the
subjects, require not only that (i) the infringement must be based on
public interest necessities but also (ii) the degree of infringement shall
maintain proper balance with the degree of necessities. Infringements
which are not proportionate to the public interest necessities are
therefore illegal. Minobe also mentions several judgments of the
                          2
Administrative Court as “examples” of his view. However, on closer


1 DAI NIHON TEIKOKU KENPŌ [MEIJI KENPŌ] [CONSTITUTION], translated in
  http://www.ndl.go.jp/constitution/e/etc/c02.html (Japan).
2 In the pre-war period, administrative litigations under the enumerative principle were
  handled by the single Administrative Court in Tokyo. In the post-war period,
  administrative litigations are handled by ordinary courts, based on the Special Law on
Functions of the Proportionality Principle in Japanese Administrative Law                 207


analysis, we find that neither the term “proportionality” nor the
underlying logic was used in the judgments themselves. It is not clear
whether the main emphasis of Minobe’s view is on the application of the
PP or on the denial of administrative discretion. Today, the German
understanding of the concept (suitability, necessity and proportionality in
the narrow sense) is also widely accepted among administrative law
academics. They treat the PP as one of the “general principles of
                               3
(administrative) law”.             Some statutes can be understood as an
                                                                                    4
expression of the principle (e.g. Police Duties Execution Law Art. 1
                                                                                   5
para. 2, Law on Substitute Execution by Administration                                  Art.2)
However, there is no unanimous understanding about its legal
                                                                                             6
foundation. Some say that it is Art. 13 of the present Constitution,
some say that it is the rule of law, others say it is the rule of reason (jōri).
While the practical benefits of this “legal foundation” discussion may be
doubtful, some argue that it is necessary to find the foundation in the


    Administrative Case Litigation (1948), followed by the Administrative Case
    Litigation Law (1962).
3   Hikaru Takagi mentions the three classical German tests ((1) the suitability test, (2)
    the necessity test and (3) the proportionality test (in the narrow sense)) in his
    textbook. HIKARU TAKAGI, GYŌSEIHŌ [ADMINISTRATIVE LAW] 66 (2015)（高木光，
    行政法，頁66（2015年）             ）. On the other hand, Hiroshi Shiono mentions only (2) the
    “necessity principle” and (3) “proportionality between the purpose and the means
    (prohibition of excessive regulation (Übermaßverbot)), and omits (1) the suitability
    test. HIROSHI SHIONO, GYŌSEIHŌ I [ADMINISTRATIVE LAW I] 93 (6th ed. 2015)（塩野
    宏，行政法 I，6版，頁93（2015年）                   ）.
4   Keisatsukan Shokumu Shikko Hō [Police Duties Execution Law], Law No. 36 of
    1948 (Japan).
5   Gyōsei Daishikkō Hō [Law on Substitute Execution by Administration], Law No. 43
    of 1948 (Japan).
6   “All of the people shall be respected as individuals. Their right to life, liberty, and the
    pursuit of happiness shall, to the extent that it does not interfere with the public
    welfare, be the supreme consideration in legislation and in other governmental
    affairs.” NIHONKOKU KENPŌ [KENPŌ] [CONSTITUTION], art. 13, translated in
    http://www.ndl.go.jp/constitution/e/etc/c01.html (Japan).
208                                     《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


constitutional text in order for the PP to serve as a basis of judicial
review of statutory laws. As in Germany, the PP was first introduced in
the field of police law, and as such, there would be little problem in
expanding its scope to the area of regulatory administrative activities in
general. The principle can also be applied to service-providing
administrative activities such as social welfare, where state activity can
be understood as an infringement upon the legitimate interests of
citizens, for example, and the withdrawal of the livelihood protection
                                                                                 7
allowance (e.g. Judgment of the Fukuoka District Court 26 May 1998 ).
More difficult theoretical problems are: (i) can the principle also be
understood to be a general principle that restricts state activities (can the
principle function in the direction of limiting social welfare service?
How does it relate to the principle of subsidiarity?) (ii) Can the principle
also limit inactions of the government, when the important interests of
citizens are in danger (the inverse proportionality principle)? The
Supreme Court of Japan is generally rather reluctant to mention abstract
principles in its judgments, although they are in fact based on extensive
research activities of the court on domestic and foreign legal academic
materials. This is also true of the PP. The court has never mentioned the
name of the principle itself in the opinion of the court except as an obiter
                                                              8
dictum (Judgment of the Supreme Court, Feb. 7, 2006 ) or in a negative
                                                               9
context (Judgment of the Supreme Court, June 4, 1964 ). Therefore, it is


7 Fukuoka Chihō Saibansho [Fukuoka Dist. Ct.] May 26, 1998, 1994 (Gyō-Hi) 31,
  1678 HANREI JIHŌ [HANJI] 72 (Japan).
8 Saikō Saibansho [Sup. Ct.] Feb. 7, 2006, 2003 (Ju) 2001, 60(2) SAIKŌ SAIBANSHO
  MINJI HANREISHŪ [MINSHŪ] 401, translated in http://www.courts.go.jp/app/hanrei_en/
  detail?id=814 (Japan).
9 Saikō Saibansho [Sup. Ct.] June 4, 1964, 1962 (O) 49, 18(5) SAIKŌ SAIBANSHO MINJI
  HANREISHŪ [MINSHŪ] 745 (Japan) (quashing the judgment of the original court that
  revoked an administrative disposition based on the PP).
Functions of the Proportionality Principle in Japanese Administrative Law                  209


always difficult to determine whether a particular court judgment
employed the PP or not. For the sake of discussion in this essay, we find
two main functions of the PP: necessity control and balancing
         10
control.      Both functions are based on purpose-means construction,
which serves as the core of the principle. In examining court
judgments, we will see how and in what context either or both of the
functions may appear.



II. Judicial Control of Administrative Discretion and
    the PP

A. Outside? Inside?
      The first question to be asked is whether (a) the PP lies outside of
the domain of administrative discretion, namely when the PP forms the
boundary of the discretion or (b) the PP functions as an internal control
directive of the discretion.



10 “Necessity control” in this paper corresponds to (2) the necessity test (from the three
   classical German tests) and “balancing control” corresponds to (3) the proportionality
   test. In the authors’ view, (1) the suitability test is a prerequisite for necessity control;
   if a means is not “suitable” for attaining the purpose of law, then it can never be
   “necessary”. The author employs this dichotomy in order to emphasize the difference
   in functions of the two controls. See Tadasu Watari, Rieki Kōryō Gata Shinsa to Hirei
   Gensoku [Judicial Review Based on Balancing of Interests and the Proportionality
   Principle], 339 HŌGAKU KYŌSHITSU 37, 43 (2008)（亘理格，利益衡量型司法審査
   と比例原則，法学教室，339号，頁43（2008年）                                ）. Yoko Suto argues that (2) the
   suitability test is not important in administrative discretion control, while the test is
   essential in the review of the constitutionality of statutory laws. YOKO SUTO, HIREI
   GENSOKU NO GENDAITEKI IGI TO KINŌ [CONTEMPORARY SIGNIFICANCE AND
   FUNCTION OF THE PROPORTIONALITY PRINCIPLE] 258-259 (2010)（須藤陽子，比例
   原則の現代的意義と機能，頁258-259（2010年）                               ）.
210                                           《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


      Minobe’s classical understanding seems to take the former view. He
explains the PP in the framework of the distinction between (i) a fully
bounded act (Kisoku Kōi), (ii) a legally bounded discretionary act
(Kisoku Sairyō Kōi), (iii) and a free discretionary act (Jiyū Sairyō Kōi).
The important practical distinction lies between (ii) and (iii). According
to Minobe, the Administrative Court cannot deal with (iii) as the subject
of an administrative litigation. When a suit is filed against such
administrative acts, the court should dismiss the case declaring that the
                                           11
case is outside of its competence.              On the contrary, the administrative
discretion granted in (ii) is the “finding of law” (Rechtsfindung), so that
the Administrative Court should review the legality of the administrative
act. Hence, it can be said that Minobe principally argues on the basis of a
dichotomous distinction between fully reviewable judicial acts and non-
                                         12
reviewable discretionary acts.                  For Minobe, the most important
standard for the distinction is whether the administrative act infringes
upon pre-existing rights, interests or the freedom of the people. If this is
the case, “the act cannot be a free discretionary act in any
                   13
circumstances”.         Since the Meiji Constitution Art. 22 guarantees the
freedom and property of the subject, the infringement upon them must
always be bound by the law. It is in this context that Minobe mentions
the PP. Only in the case of (i) and (ii), which is subject to full review by
the Administrative Court, can the PP be applied. The judgment as to

11 However, the actual contemporary practice of the Administrative Court seems to have
   been somewhat different. Minobe complains that the contemporary practice of the
   Court did not dismiss the litigation against discretionary administrative act but let the
   plaintiff lose on the merit of the case. TATSUKICHI MINOBE, GYŌSEI SAIBANHŌ
   [ADMINISTRATIVE LITIGATION LAW] 157 (1929)（美濃部達吉，行政裁判法，頁
   157（1929年）     ）.
12 TATSUKICHI MINOBE, NIHON GYŌSEIHŌ [JAPANESE ADMINISTRATIVE LAW] 929-932
   (1940)（美濃部達吉，日本行政法，頁929-932（1940年）                            ）.
13 Id. at 933.
Functions of the Proportionality Principle in Japanese Administrative Law       211


whether to grant discretion precedes the application of the PP. Therefore,
we can observe that the PP functions outside of the (free) discretion in
Minobe’s theory.

     The situation has changed today. As has already been mentioned,
the Administrative Court was abolished and administrative litigations
came to be handled by ordinary courts based on the Special Law on
                                                  14
Administrative Case Litigation in 1948,                and subsequently by the
                                                                15
present Administrative Case Litigation Law in 1962.                  Art. 30 of the
latter stipulates that the court may revoke a discretionary administrative
disposition “only in cases where the disposition has been made beyond
the bounds of the agency’s discretionary power or through an abuse of
such power”. This means that the administrative litigations against
“discretionary administrative disposition” are not totally outside of the
competence of the courts, but instead, they shall regard the litigations as
legally valid so long as the other requirements (existence of
administrative dispositions, standing to sue, period limitations etc.) are
met. It is only that the degree of judicial control will be limited.

     From this perspective, the problem of administrative discretion
shall not be treated on the basis of dichotomous classification of fully
reviewable judicial acts and non-reviewable discretionary acts. Instead,
the problem will be on which issues in the application process of law
discretion shall be admitted.

     Before going into this issue, we must first examine the premises of


14 Gyōsei Jiken Soshō Tokureihō [Special Law on Administrative Case Litigation], Law
   No. 81 of 1948 (Japan).
15 Gyōsei Jiken Soshōhō [Administrative Case Litigation Law], Law No. 139 of 1962,
   translated in http://www.japaneselawtranslation.go.jp/law/detail/?id=1922&vm=02&
   re=01&new=1 (Japan).
212                                        《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


the discussion, namely how Japanese legal theory and practice
understands the legal process which leads to administrative disposition.

B. Premises of the Discussion

      1. Logical Steps of the Application of Administrative Law
      Normally, the application process in cases of administrative
dispositions can be classified in the following logical steps (legal
syllogism). We can first distinguish (1) legal interpretation of the text of
the statute as the basis of the disposition and (2) fact-finding of the
circumstances in the concrete relevant case. Based on (1) and (2), the
administrative agency will reach the final conclusion, which is
understood as the application of a general legal norm to a concrete
circumstance (Subsumption) (3). While this whole process can be
referred to as “application”, this paper uses the term “application” in the
                                                                                         16
narrower sense, in order to contrast the term with “interpretation”.
Namely, the “application of law” includes (2) and (3).

      (2) Fact-finding can further be divided into (2-1) the decision of the



16 The author has written a short memorandum on the distinction of “interpretation” and
   “application” in administrative law based on so-called “Toulmin model” (See
   STEPHEN E. TOULMIN, THE USES OF ARGUMENT (updated ed. 2003)), although it is
   still under-developed. See Narufumi Kadomatsu, Gyōseihō ni Okeru Hō no Kaishaku
   to Tekiyō ni kansuru Oboegaki [A Memorandum on Interpretation/Application of Law
   in Administrative Law], in GENDAI GYŌSEIHŌ NO KŌZO TO TENKAI [STRUCTURE AND
   DEVELOPMENT OF CONTEMPORARY ADMINISTRATIVE LAW] 383-400 (Katsuya Uga &
   Hisashi Kōketsu eds., 2016)（角松生史，行政法における法の解釈と適用に関す
   る覚え書き，收於：宇賀克也、交告尚史編，現代行政法の構造と展開，頁
   383-400（2016年））. In short, the interpretation of law is an effort to present
   “warrants” as a general proposition, which is minimally necessary to “bridge” “data”
   and “claim”, both singular propositions. Finding “backing” for the “warrants” is also
   included in the interpretation of law. As such, the interpretation of law is establishing
   a general legal proposition.
Functions of the Proportionality Principle in Japanese Administrative Law       213


administration as to which factors shall be considered in the relevant case
                                  17
and weighting of the factors,          and (2-2) determination of bare facts.


     Chart: Logical steps of the application of administrative law


   Statutory
   text




(1) interpretation of law                                       (2‐1) which factors
                                                                shall be considered
                                                                and weighting of the
                                                                factors
                                   (2) Fact‐finding

                                                                (2‐2) determination
                                                                of bare facts




            (3) conclusion for the
            concrete case (Subsumption)

        Source: author.


     When the court reviews this application of law by an administrative
agency, although there is no express legal ground, Japanese legal theory
and practice takes it as a matter of fact that neither for (1) the


17 Designing the procedure for judgment also belongs to this category, but will be
   excluded from consideration in this paper.
214                                        《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


                         18
interpretation of law         nor for (2-2) the determination of bare facts can
                                              19
administrative discretion be granted.              The court always performs full
review of these issues and substitutes its judgment for the administrative
judgment.

      Therefore, administrative discretion can only be granted on (2-1)
the decision of the administration as to which factors are to be
considered and their weighting standard and on (3) reaching the final
conclusion for the case (Subsumption), namely how the administration
evaluates factors that have been considered and renders its decision after
the balancing.

      2. Distinction between Judgment on the Legal Requirements
         and the Judgment on the Choice of Measures
      Another premise of Japanese discussion on this issue is the
distinction between judgment on the legal requirements and judgment on
the choice of measures. Let us examine an example of disciplinary
                                                                   20
measures based on the National Public Service Law                       Art. 82. Para. 1
stipulates the following:




18 To be sure, it is sometimes difficult to distinguish interpretation and application, but
   the former can be distinguished from the latter in that it is a making of general legal
   proposition. See supra note 16.
19 However, when the determination of facts requires expert technical knowledge across
   a wide range of fields and future forecasts, administrative discretion may be granted.
   Cf. Saikō Saibansho [Sup. Ct.] Oct. 29, 1992, 1985 (Gyō-Tsu) 133, 46(7) SAIKŌ
   SAIBANSHO MINJI HANREISHŪ [MINSHŪ] 1174, translated in http://www.courts.go.jp/
   app/hanrei_en/detail?id=1399 (Japan) (Ikata Atomic Power Plant).
20 Kokka Kōmuin Hō [National Public Service Law], Law No. 120 of 1947, translated
   in http://www.japaneselawtranslation.go.jp/law/detail/?id=2713&vm=02&re=01&new
   =1 (Japan).
Functions of the Proportionality Principle in Japanese Administrative Law   215


           Article 82 (1) When an official falls under any of the
     following items, the official may, as disciplinary action, be
     dismissed, suspended from duty, suffer a reduction in pay or be
     reprimanded:
           (i) when the official has violated this Law, the National
     Public Service Ethics Law or orders issued pursuant to these
     laws . . . ;
           (ii) when the official has breached the obligations in the
     course of duties or has neglected duties;
           (iii) when the official is guilty of malfeasance rendering
     the official unfit to fulfill the role as a servant of all citizens.

     When an officer with disciplinary authority considers filing
disciplinary actions against a public employee, the officer should first
determine whether conduct of the employee meets the (i) - (iii)
requirements. This process is “judgment on legal requirements”. After
coming to the conclusion that either of the requirements are met, the
authority makes a decision on whether or not it will render disciplinary
measures, and if it does, which measures—dismissal, suspension from
duty, reduction in pay, admonishment—shall be taken. This process is
the “choice of measures”.

     Unlike the practice of German law, which uses the term
“discretion” only for the latter process (choice of measures) and uses
“room for judgment” (Beurteilungspielraum) for the former (judgment
on requirements), Japanese legal theory and practice uses the term
“discretion” (Sairyō, 裁量) for the both processes.

     Given the above-mentioned premises of Japanese legal theory and
practice, this paper argues as follows: (1) “Necessity control” functions
216                                   《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


primarily on the level of legal interpretation in the form of general
proposition, and provides the prerequisites of the exercise of
administrative discretion that takes place at the subsumption level.
Hence it lies outside of the domain of discretion. (2) On the other hand,
“balancing control” functions mainly as the control of the subsumption
process under concrete circumstances and is therefore an internal
control. However, the balancing control sometimes accompanies the
statement of general legal propositions, which serves as the control from
outside. This point will be illustrated in the examination of Japanese
judicial decisions.

C. “Generally Accepted Social Ideas” Control of Discretion
      Based on these premises, how does the judiciary handle the
discretion issue? In a case where the legality of the disciplinary action
against a national public employee was questioned, the Supreme Court
                                                        21
Judgment Dec. 20, 1977 (Kobe Customs Office Case)            granted a wide
range of administrative discretion in the choice of measures. Provided
that the action of a national employee meets the requirements of the
disciplinary measures according to National Public Service Law Art. 82
para.1, the disciplinary authority must consider such various factors as
the reason, motive, nature and influences of the action in deciding
whether or not the action calls for disciplinary measures and what kind
of measure should be chosen. “Since such decisions will be done on the
basis of comprehensive consideration of such extensive factors, a proper
judgment cannot be expected unless we give discretion to those in
charge of supervising subordinate employees who have ample


21 Saikō Saibansho [Sup. Ct.] Dec. 20, 1977, 1972 (Gyō-Tsu) 52, 31(7) SAIKŌ
   SAIBANSHO MINJI HANREISHŪ [MINSHŪ] 1101 (Japan).
Functions of the Proportionality Principle in Japanese Administrative Law            217


knowledge of the situation in the office”.

      The Court continues in stating that against this discretion which
emphasizes the necessity of a decision based on the comprehensive
consideration of various factors by “the person in charge on the spot”,
judicial control will be limited. When the Court examines the legality of
such discretionary decision, the court shall not substitute its decision
for the administrative decision but the decision can be found illegal
only when “it significantly lacks appropriateness in the light of
generally accepted social ideas so that it shall be seen as abuse of
discretion”.

      Such a concept of judicial control based on “generally accepted
                22
social ideas”        against discretionary dispositions can also be observed in
the following Supreme Court cases. This wording may puzzle foreign
           23
observers       who may have doubts about the reason why the court can
introduce the idea of “society” into “the system of law”. The court
probably uses the concept in order to explain why it can enforce its
judgment against the decision of democratically accountable organs
without falling into purely subjective evaluation by the judges. Such


22 The earliest usages of the phrase “significantly lacks appropriateness in the light of
   socially accepted ideas” by the Supreme Court can be found at Judgment of the
   Supreme Court, Saikō Saibansho [Sup. Ct.] July 3, 1953, 1951 (O) 685, 7(7) SAIKŌ
   SAIBANSHO MINJI HANREISHŪ [MINSHŪ] 811 (Japan) (land grant disposition in
   farmland reform); Saikō Saibansho [Sup. Ct.] July 30, 1954, 1953 (O) 745, 8(7)
   SAIKŌ SAIBANSHO MINJI HANREISHŪ [MINSHŪ] 1501 (Japan) (disciplinary action
   (expulsion from public university)).
23 Ryuji Yamamoto, a professor at the University of Tokyo, confesses that he found
   difficulty in translating and explaining the concept to German colleagues in his
   presentation at the Japan-Germany Administrative Law Symposium on Feb. 11 2006.
   Ryuji Yamamoto, Nihon ni Okeru Sairyō Ron no Henyō [Transformation of
   Discretion Doctrine in Japan], 1933 HANREI JIHŌ 11, 15 (2006)（山本隆司，日本
   における裁量論の変容，判例時報，1933号，頁15（2006年）                              ）.
218                                          《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


being the case, the degree of control is limited to the case when the
administrative decision is “significantly inappropriate”. Hitoshi Murata,
a high court judge, understands this concept to be “a loose application of
          24
the PP”.

      Generally speaking, this “generally accepted social ideas” control
has always been criticized as being too deferential toward the
administration. But at the same time, the possibility of judicial control is
still open. Except for the rhetorical formula of what is “significantly
inappropriate”, there is no logical limit as to how far the judicial control
            25
might go.        How loose or stringent the control may be depends not upon
a definite principle but rather upon the attitude of the Court.

      Another point to be mentioned is that the Kobe Customs Office
Supreme Court Judgment grants discretion only on the choice of
measures. Discretion as to the legal requirements of disciplinary actions
                                           26
was not granted in this case.                   The court did not defer to the


24 Hitoshi Murata, Gyōseihō ni Okeru Hireigensoku [Proportionality Principle in
   Administrative Law], in GYŌSEI SŌSHŌ [ADMINISTATIVE LITIGATION AND
   ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL] 79, 87-88 (Masayuki Fujiyama & Hitoshi Murata eds., rev.
   ed. 2012)（村田斉志，行政法における比例原則，收於：藤山雅行、村田斉志
   編，行政争訟，改訂版，頁87-88（2012年）                          ）.
25 This may be the result of the fact that this control is the variation of “abuse” control as
   opposed to “boundary” control of discretion. Cf. Mitsuo Kobayakawa, Sairyō Mondai
   to Hōritsu Mondai [Question of Discretion and Question of Law], in 2 HŌGAKU
   KYŌKAI HYAKUSHŪNEN KINEN RONBUNSHŪ [FESTSCHRIFT FOR 100 YEAR
   ANNIVERSARY OF THE JURISPRUDENCE ASSOCIATION VOL. 2] 331, 342-344 (1983)（小
   早川光郎，裁量問題と法律問題，收於：法学協会編，法学協会百周年記念論
   文集第2卷，頁342-344（1983年）                ）.
26 This does not mean that the Supreme Court does not grant discretion on the judgment
   of legal requirements. On the contrary, it often does so. Judgment of the Supreme
   Court, Oct. 4, 1978 (Saikō Saibansho [Sup. Ct.] Oct. 4, 1978, 1975 (Gyō-Tsu) 120,
   32(7) SAIKŌ SAIBANSHO MINJI HANREISHŪ [MINSHŪ] 1223, translated in
   http://www.courts.go.jp/app/hanrei_en/detail?id=56 (Japan) (Renewal of term of
   sojourn by a foreigner. McLean Case).) and judgment of the Supreme Court Oct. 29,
Functions of the Proportionality Principle in Japanese Administrative Law          219


administrative decision but rendered its own judgment that the actions
of the plaintiffs (national employees) meet the requirements of Art. 82
para.1 item (1) and (3), although the conclusion is the same. This was
done although item (3) employs vague legal concepts (unbestimmter
Rechtsbegriff in German law) such as “misconduct as to render
himself/herself unfit to be a servant of all citizens”.

D. “Control of the Judgment-making Process” Regarding
   Administrative Discretion

     1. Nikkō Tarō Sugi Judgment
     In 1973, the Tokyo High Court rendered a landmark judgment
                     27              28
(Nikkō Tarō Sugi          Judgment)       that found dispositions in the process
of land expropriation illegal. Tochigi prefecture drafted a project plan to
expand a national road which included a site owned by Nikkō Tōshōgu, a
famous and historically significant Shinto shrine located within a special
protection area based on Natural Parks Law. Because the shrine refused
to sell the land voluntarily, the Minister of Construction authorized the
use of land expropriation after it received an application from the
prefecture. The shrine filed suit. The issue before the court was deciding
                                                                                    29
if the project plan met the requirement of the Land Expropriation Law,
that the plan would “contribute to the appropriate and rational use of


   1992 (Saikō Saibansho [Sup. Ct.] Oct. 29, 1992, 1985 (Gyō-Tsu) 133, 46(7) SAIKŌ
   SAIBANSHO MINJI HANREISHŪ [MINSHŪ] 1174, translated in http://www.courts.go.jp/
   app/hanrei_en/detail?id=1399 (Japan) (Ikata Atomic Power Plant).) are famous
   examples for granting such discretion.
27 Tarō Sugi is the name of the biggest ceder (Sugi) in Nikkō Tōshōgū Shrine that bears
   the name “Tarō”, a typical name for firstborn sons in Japan.
28 Tōkyō Kōtō Saibansho [Tokyo High Ct.] July 13, 1973, 1969 (Gyō-Ko) 12, 24(6/7)
   GYŌSEI JIKEN SAIBAN REISHŪ [GYŌSAI REISHŪ] 533 (Japan).
29 Tochi Shūyō Hō [Land Expropriation Law], Law No. 219 of 1951 (Japan).
220                                          《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


land” (Art. 20 Item 3).
                                                                         30
      Both the first-instance court (Utsunomiya District Court)               and the
Tokyo High Court found the disposition by the minister illegal, but the
methods of reasoning were different. Both judgments interpret the above
requirement of Art. 20 Item 3 as follows: it requires a comparative
balance between the public benefits to be gained by use of the contested
area by the particular project and the harms suffered by such use (this
harm includes not only private interests but sometimes also public
interests). Only when the former benefits exceed the latter harms will the
                                                                                   31
requirement of Art. 20 Item 3 of the Land Expropriation Law be met.
Since then, this interpretation has been almost unanimously followed in
judicial/administrative practice and by academics.

      However, while the first-instance court did not admit administrative
discretion of the Minister of Construction, the Tokyo High Court
acknowledged it. Nevertheless, the court submitted the following
standard of review for such discretionary dispositions.

           “There may be cases when the minister, in making
      judgment over the above requirement, unjustly and carelessly
      makes light of various elements and values which shall deserve
      the utmost regard from the outset, with the result that it lacks
      due consideration. There may also be cases when the minister
      considers factors that should not be considered or overvalues
      less significant factors. When the judgment of the minister is



30 Utsunomiya Chihō Saibansho [Utsunomiya Dist. Ct.] Apr. 9, 1969, 1964 (Gyō-U) 4
   & 1967 (Gyō-U) 2, 20(4) GYŌSEI JIKEN SAIBAN REISHŪ [GYŌSAI REISHŪ] 373 (Japan).
31 The text is quoted from the Tokyo High Court judgment, but the understanding of the
   first-instance court is virtually the same.
Functions of the Proportionality Principle in Japanese Administrative Law   221


     influenced by such improperness, the decision will be found
     illegal because of the error in the manner and process of
     discretionary judgment.”

     Based on this standard, the court examined the actual judgment-
making process of Tochigi prefecture in making the project plan and the
examination process over the plan by the Minister of Construction. It
reached the conclusion that the decision of the minister (i) unjustly and
carelessly underestimated cultural values and the importance of
environmental protection, factors which shall deserve utmost regard,
therefore lacking due consideration, (ii) considered the prognosis of the
increase of traffic due to the Tokyo Olympic Games (1964), which was a
factor not to be considered because the increase would only be
temporary, (iii) overestimated the risk of tree fall that may be caused by
typhoons and the present weakening of the growing condition of the
trees. Thus, the court summarizes the “manner and process” of
discretionary judgment by the minister as “erroneous”. The court
concluded that “if the judgment had been done without such errors, the
minister might have reached the final conclusion” and held the
disposition to be illegal.

     The judgment of the Tokyo High Court captured the attention of the
academic community. Contemporary case commentaries understood the
judgment to have introduced “a new method of judicial control”
regarding discretionary administrative activities from the perspective of
control of the judgment-making process instead of just ratifying the
administrative decision or giving the court the power of substantial
decision on issues that confront the diversification of values in
222                                       《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


                           32
contemporary society.           However, it should also be noted that some
commentaries in later years doubt whether the approach taken by the
High Court does not limit itself to control of the judgment-making
process but instead has a tendency to enforce the courts’ substantial
                   33
value judgment.

      While the Nikkō Tarō Sugi Judgment and its “control of the
                                                              34
judgment-making process” (Handan Katei Shinsa ) approach received
extensive attention, there have not been many judicial decisions that
have used this approach and have subsequently found administrative
                                           35
activities to be illegal until recently.




32 See, e.g., Naohiko Harada, Hanhi—Tōkyō Kōhan Shōwa 48nen 7gatu 13nichi [Case
   Comment—Judgment of the Tokyo High Court, July 13, 1973], 565 JURISUTO 41, 43
   (1974)（原田尚彦，判批（東京高判昭和48年7月13日），ジュリスト，565号
  （昭和48年度重要判例解説）），頁43（1974年）; Hiroshi Shiono, Hanhi—Tōkyō
   Kōhan Shōwa 48nen 7gatu 13nichi [Case Comment—Judgment of the Tokyo High
   Court, July 13, 1973], 178 HANREI HYŌRON 21, 25 (1973)（塩野宏，判批（東京高
   判昭和48年7月13日）            ，判例評論，178号，頁25（1973年）                 ）.
33 YASUTAKA ABE, GYŌSEI SAIRYŌ TO GYŌSEI KYŪSAI [ADMINISTRATIVE DISCRETION
   AND ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDY] 126, 128 (1987)（阿部泰隆，行政裁量と行政救
   済，頁126、128（1987年）             ）.
34 I assume that “control of the decision-making process” forms a more natural
   expression in English, however, since the original Japanese “Handan” has a more
   cognitive rather than voluntaristic aspect, I chose “control of the judgment-making
   process” as the translation.
35 One of the exceptions may be the Nibutani Dam Judgment (Sapporo Chihō Saibansho
   [Sapporo Dist. Ct.] Mar. 27, 1997, 1993 (Gyō-U) 9, 1598 HANREI JIHŌ [HANJI] 33
   (Japan).) which declared the land expropriation disposition (Land Expropriation Law
   Art. 47-2) for a project to construct a large dam which would also destroy the “sacred
   places” of Japan’s indigenous Ainu people. (English translation of this judgment by
   Mark Levin can be found at Mark Levin, Kayano et al. v. Hokkaido Expropriation
   Committee: ‘The Nibutani Dam Decision’, 38 INT’L LEGAL MATERIALS 394, http://
   ssrn.com/abstract=1635447.)
Functions of the Proportionality Principle in Japanese Administrative Law            223



     2. The Supreme Court: Integration of “Control of the
        Judgment-making Process” into “Generally Accepted Social
        Ideas Control”
      On the other hand, the Supreme Court seems to have incorporated
some elements of “control of the judgment-making process” into its
decisions. In a Supreme Court Judgment on Mar. 8, 1996 (the Jehovah’s
                  36                                                            37
Witness case),         the court ruled that the expulsion disposition                of a
municipal technical college student was illegal. In this case, the student
had refused to take Kendō (Japanese fencing) practice in a physical
education course for reasons of his religious faith. Therefore, he failed to
receive credit for the course, which was a compulsory subject. At the end
of the school year, the school principal presented a disposition against
him to retain him in the same grade for another year. In the next year, the
situation remained the same and the student was expelled from the
school according to the school policy. The student filed a revocation suit
against the disposition.

      In judging the case, the court stood on the premise that the school
principal has a discretion over such dispositions and that those
dispositions can be found illegal only “when they have no foundation in
fact or when they lack appropriateness in the light of generally accepted
social ideas so that it shall be seen as beyond the bounds of discretion of


36 Saikō Saibansho [Sup. Ct.] Mar. 8, 1996, 1995 (Gyō-Tsu) 74, 50(3) SAIKŌ
   SAIBANSHO MINJI HANREISHŪ [MINSHŪ] 469, translated in http://www.courts.go.jp/
   app/hanrei_en/detail?id=294 (Japan). Here and for other Supreme Court Judgments,
   the author uses the provisional translation on the website of the court, but these
   sometimes differ in the use of equivalents, which is necessary for the consistency of
   this article.
37 A disposition against the same student to retain in the same class for another year was
   also found to be illegal.
224                                        《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


abuse of discretion”.

      However, after employing the above traditional rhetorical formula,
the court emphasizes that disposition of expulsion should be chosen
“only if it is deemed unavoidable to expel the relevant student from
school from an educational viewpoint. In determining the requirements
therefore, utmost care should be taken, involving yet more prudence than
when other types of disposition are chosen”. The utmost care should also
be taken for the disposition to retain in the same class for the next year.

      The court further held that (i) Kendō practice may not be a requisite
for technical colleges and the educational purpose of physical education
can also be accomplished in alternative ways, and (ii) the reason why the
student refused to participate in Kendō practice was closely related to the
core of his faith, while a consequence of his refusal to participate was
                              38
gravely disadvantageous.

      The student had repeatedly requested his teachers to provide
alternative activities, such as writing reports and the like, but the
technical college bluntly refused the requests. The Court says:

           “In light of the above nature of each of the said
      dispositions, . . . sufficient consideration should have been



38 The court first confirms that the case is not about direct restriction of religious
   freedom (NIHONKOKU KENPŌ [KENPŌ] [CONSTITUTION], art. 20, para. 1 (Japan).
   “Freedom of religion is guaranteed to all. No religious organization shall receive any
   privileges from the State, nor exercise any political authority” per se, because neither
   of the dispositions oblige the student to “take action incompatible with the doctrine
   underlying his faith as far as its contents are concerned”. However, according to the
   court, they are of such a nature that the student “had no choice but to participate in
   Kendō practice, which was an activity in conflict with the doctrine underlying his
   faith, to avoid grave disadvantages inflicted by these dispositions.
Functions of the Proportionality Principle in Japanese Administrative Law            225


                                                                            39
     given to the rightness of offering any alternative activity , the
     way and manner thereof, if any, and so on before each of the
     said dispositions was handed down, but there is no proof of any
     such consideration being given in this case.”

      In conclusion, the court found that the judgment of the school
principal in carrying out the above dispositions, based on the evaluation
by the teacher who did not give ample consideration to alternative
activities and “fails to take into account the matters to be considered, or
obviously falls short of rationally evaluating the facts under
                                                                 40
consideration”, to be illegal “beyond the bounds                       of discretionary
authority.”

      Here the Supreme Court employs a method of judicial control that
examines whether the administration has appropriately measured and
evaluated the “matters to be considered”, although the decision does not
use the term “judgment-making process”. The court also interprets the
law and shows perspectives for this examination, namely (i) the dilemma
between expulsion from the school or remaining in the same class on the
one side and other disciplinary dispositions imposed on the other, and
(ii) the analysis of the situation of the student from the viewpoint of
religious freedom.
                                                                41
      In a Supreme Court Judgment on Nov. 2, 2006                     over the approval


39 As a premise, the court also confirms that taking alternative measures will not be a
   violation of Article 20, para. 3 of the Constitution which guarantees the separation of
   religion and the state.
40 Here the court uses “beyond the bounds of discretion” instead of “abuse of
   discretion”.
41 Saikō Saibansho [Sup. Ct.] Nov. 2, 2006, 2004 (Gyō-Hi) 114, 60(9) SAIKŌ
   SAIBANSHO MINJI HANREISHŪ [MINSHŪ] 3249, translated in http://www.courts.go.jp/
   app/hanrei_en/detail?id=863 (Japan).
226                                          《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


of a city-planning project of the Tokyo Metropolitan Government related
to the elevated structure of an urban high-speed railroad, the court
established a clearer formula for reviewing discretionary administrative
dispositions.

           “Therefore, when the court examines the legality of the
      decision to adopt a city plan on city facilities or of the content
      of the change of the plan, the court should regard such decision
      or change as an exercise of the discretionary power granted to
      the administrative authority, and should find illegality in such
      decision or change only where the administrative agency’s
      decision or change can be regarded to go beyond the bounds of
      discretionary power or constituting an abuse of such power by
                                                        42
      reason that the decision or change (1) lacks a critical factual
      basis due to errors in fact-finding based on which the decision
      was made, or by reason that the decision seems (2)significantly
      inappropriate in light of the generally accepted social ideas
      because the agency’s (2-1)assessments of facts is obviously
      unreasonable or (2-2)the agency has not taken into
      consideration the matters that should have been considered in
      the judgment-making process.”

      Here the court integrates control of the “judgment-making process”
                                                                                            43
into the traditional “generally accepted social ideas” formula.


42 Numbers in parentheses are inserted not by the court but by the author of this essay.
43 Hiroyuki Hashimoto claims that there is at least one significant theoretical difference
   in the premise of the Nikkō Tarō Sugi Judgment type of control and the present
   Supreme Court control formula. Since the former judgment by the Tokyo High Court
   revoked the decision of the minister, focusing on the “erroneous manners and
   process” of the discretion by the minister, there is at least a theoretical possibility that
   the minister will reach the same conclusion again, this time after a deliberate
Functions of the Proportionality Principle in Japanese Administrative Law        227


Discretionary dispositions may be found to be illegal by the courts when
they:

     (1) lack a critical factual basis (the premise is that the courts can
exercise de novo control of fact finding)
     (2) are significantly inappropriate in light of the generally accepted
social ideas
     because of
     (2-1) obviously unreasonable assessment of facts
     or
     (2-2) failure in the judgment-making process such as the due
consideration of matters to be considered

     The above Supreme Court judgment did not find the approval of
the city planning to be illegal. However, employing similar formulae, the
Supreme Court has found two discretionary dispositions concerning
                                                                 44
permission of use of public facilities for other purposes.


   consideration (Mitsuo Kobayakawa, Hanhi—Tōkyō Kōhan Shōwa 48nen 7gatu
   13nichi [Case Comment—Judgment of the Tokyo High Court, July 13, 1973], 103
   BESSATSU JURISUTO 118, 120 (1989))（小早川光郎，判批（東京高判昭和48年7
   月13日），別冊ジュリスト，103号（街づくり・国づくり判例百選），頁120
  （1989年））. Hashimoto seems to be skeptical that the Supreme Court formula,
   however, will allow such a possibility of repetition. Cf. HIROYUKI HASHIMOTO,
   GYŌSEI HANREI TO SHIKUMI KAISHAKU [ADMINISTRATIVE LAW CASE PRECEDENTS
   AND SYSTEMATIC INTERPRETATION] 152 (2009)（橋本博之，行政判例と仕組み解
   釈，頁152（2009年）          ）. On the other hand, some authors expressly affirm such a
   possibility. Cf. HIROSHI SHIONO, GYŌSEIHŌ II [ADMINISTRATIVE LAW II] 187 (5th ed.
   supplemented 2013)（塩野宏，行政法 II，5版補訂版，頁187（2013年））;
   KATSUYA UGA, GYŌSEIHŌ GAISETSU II [ADMINISTRATIVE LAW TEXT, VOL. 2] 282 (5th
   ed. 2015)（宇賀克也，行政法概説II，5版，頁282（2015年））; Yukio Okitsu,
   §33, in JOKAI GYŌSEIJIKEN SOSHŌHŌ [COMMENTARIES OF ADMINISTRATIVE CASE
   LITIGATION LAW] 661, 674 (H. Minami et al. eds., 4th ed. 2014)（興津征雄，第33
   条，南博方等編，条解行政事件訴訟法，4版，頁674（2014年）                                 ）.
44 Saikō Saibansho [Sup. Ct.] Feb. 7, 2006, 2003 (Ju) 2001, 60(2) SAIKŌ SAIBANSHO
   MINJI HANREISHŪ [MINSHŪ] 401, translated in http://www.courts.go.jp/app/hanrei_en/
228                                     《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）



III. Discretion Control and the PP

A. Outside/Inside and Necessity/Balancing
      We have described so far the development of the judicial control
formula of administrative discretion in Japan. Now let us return to the
first question at the beginning of this paper. Does the PP function
outside or inside of the domain of administrative discretion?

      As has been stated, the present administrative discretion control of
the Supreme Court integrates the “control of the judgment-making
process” method into the formula of “generally accepted social ideas”. Is
this type of discretion control an application of the PP? The answer to
this question depends upon how we understand the PP.

      As mentioned above, we find two main functions of the PP,
necessity control and balancing control. We also hold the premise that
administrative discretion can only be granted for either (i) the decision as
to which factors are to be considered and their weighting or (ii) reaching
                                                            45
the final conclusion for the case (Subsumption).                 The question of
discretion is separated from the question of interpretation of law.

      Under this premise, the classic “generally accepted social ideas”
formula of the Supreme Court can be understood to perform a type of
balancing control. It also functions not on the level of interpretation of
law but in the application in the narrower sense. In this regard, this


   detail?id=814 (Japan). Saikō Saibansho [Sup. Ct.] Dec.7, 2007, 2005 (Gyo-Hi) 163,
   61(9) SAIKŌ SAIBANSHO MINJI HANREISHŪ [MINSHŪ] 3290, translated in
   http://www.courts.go.jp/app/hanrei_en/detail?id=924 (Japan) (permission for the
   occupancy of a public seacoast area).
45 See pp. 209, 212 of this paper.
Functions of the Proportionality Principle in Japanese Administrative Law           229


                                                                             46
formula can be considered as a type of the PP loosely applied,                    which
functions “inside” of the discretion.

     What about the “control of the judgment-making process”, which
has been recently integrated in the “generally accepted social ideas”
formula? The essence of this control lies in the determination of which
factors shall be considered, and in the weighting standard of the factors
                     47
(2-1 in the Chart ). The court oversees whether the administrative
agency has conducted this process properly. The court may establish a
general legal proposition as to which factors shall be considered. A
factor may be classified as (i) factors that must be considered, (ii) factors
that should not be considered, or (iii) factors that may be considered
depending on the circumstances. This classification itself is the process
of interpretation of law, therefore it lies “outside” of the discretion.

     The court may further control the weighting of the factors. If the
court establishes a general priority rule in the weighting standard as a
general legal proposition, this is a balancing control, but it logically
precedes actual balancing and functions “outside” of the domain of
discretion.

B. Cautiousness of the Supreme Court in Setting Priority
   Rules
     However, generally speaking, the Supreme Court is rather cautious
in setting clear priority rules among diverse interests that leads to
                                48                                      49
stringent discretion control.        In a Supreme Court judgment             over the


46 See Murata, supra note 24.
47 See p. 213 of this paper.
48 RYUJI YAMAMOTO, HANREI      KARA TANKYŪSURU GYŌSEIHŌ [EXPLORING
   ADMINISTRATIVE LAW THROUGH JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS] 227 (2012)（山本隆司，判
230                                     《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


refusal of permission for the use of a public school facility for purposes
other than the original purpose, the court declared the refusal illegal, but
refrained from setting a general rule on putting weights on a particular
         50
interest.

      Let us take another example: a case where the legality of a city
planning project by the Tokyo Metropolitan Government to enlarge a
public park was questioned. This became the subject of dispute when a
decision was made to use private land in the enlargement plan when
                                                            51
public land was available. The first- instance court,            the Tokyo District
Court, found the city plan to be illegal.

            “When either privately owned land or its adjacent publicly
      owned land is available for a certain public purpose, it goes
      without saying that the fact that one of them is owned privately
      is a factor to be considered in the choice of which land to use.
      In such a case, the public authority may use the private land
      only when, for example, the public land is already used for
      another administrative purpose and such use is indispensable
      because there is no alternative, so that the necessity of attaining
      another administrative purpose surpasses the necessity of the
      park.”

      Here the District Court clearly applies the necessity control of the



                        ）.
   例から探究する行政法，頁227（2012年）
49 Saikō Saibansho [Sup. Ct.] Feb. 7, 2006, 2003 (Ju) 2001, 60(2) SAIKŌ SAIBANSHO
   MINJI HANREISHŪ [MINSHŪ] 401, translated in http://www.courts.go.jp/app/hanrei_en/
   detail?id=814 (Japan).
50 YAMAMOTO, supra note 48, at 227, 242-43.
51 Tōkyō Chihō Saibansho [Tokyo Dist. Ct.] Aug. 27, 2002, 1997 (Gyō-U) 47, 1835
   HANREI JIHŌ [HANJI] 52 (Japan).
Functions of the Proportionality Principle in Japanese Administrative Law              231


                                        52
PP. The second-instance court,               the Tokyo High Court, reversed the
first- instance court’s decision in favor of the defendant, but the Supreme
Court once again quashed and reversed the decision of the Tokyo High
        53
Court.       However, the Supreme Court does not share the view of the
first- instance court that the use of private land is allowed only when
public land is not available. Rather, the court emphasizes the need for the
rationality of “situating facilities of adequate scale at necessary
              54
locations”.        The choice between public land and private land is only
one of the factors that may be considered. Here we can observe the
court’s attitude that it is very careful in the establishment of a certain
principle for necessity control or priority rules in balancing control,
because such principle or priority rules might lead to reduction in the
flexibility of the administration. As such, the Supreme Court did not talk
about the PP in this case.

      The evaluation of the Jehovah’s Witness Judgment of the Supreme
        55
Court        is difficult in this context. The court analyzed the situation from
the standpoint of constitutional interpretation. Based on such
interpretation, the court emphasized that the double-bind situation of the
student—“he had no choice but to participate in kendō practice, which
was an activity in conflict with the doctrine underlying his faith, to avoid



52 Tōkyō Kōtō Saibansho [Tokyo High Ct.] Sept. 11, 2003, 2002 (Gyō-Ko) 234, 1845
   HANREI JIHŌ [HANJI] 54 (Japan).
53 Saikō Saibansho [Sup. Ct.] Sept. 4, 2006, 2003 (Gyō-Hi) 321, 1948 HANREI JIHŌ
   [HANJI] 26 (Japan).
54 Cf. Toshi Keikaku Hō [City Planning Law], Law No. 100 of 1968, art. 13, para. 1,
   item 11, translated in http://www.japaneselawtranslation.go.jp/law/detail/?id=1923&
   vm=02&re=01&new=1 (Japan). The law itself was not applied in the court decision
   since the city plan had been decided before the law took effect, but the court applied it
   as an unwritten principle.
55 See p. 223 of this paper.
232                                     《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


grave disadvantages”—is a matter that should be considered seriously.
The judgment of the school principal, however, “fails to take into
account the matters to be considered, or obviously falls short of
rationally evaluating the facts under consideration”, according to the
court. Whether this ruling of the court can be understood to have
established a general priority rule is open to question.

C. Kimigayo Disciplinary Action Case
      We will also examine this point by analysing a recent Supreme
Court case that is said to have clearly applied the PP (Judgment of the
                                                                                 56
Supreme Court. Jan. 16, 2012 (Kimigayo Disciplinary Action Case)).
This was a judgment concerning a disciplinary action against public
school teachers in Tokyo who refused to stand up and sing Kimigayo,
Japan’s national anthem, during school ceremonies (entrance or
graduation ceremonies). Some Japanese people, including school
teachers, consider Kimigayo and Hinomaru, Japan’s national flag, to be
closely connected to Japan’s history of militarism and imperialism. On
the other hand, since the late 1990s, the Ministry of Education has felt it
to be important that the Hinomaru be raised at public school ceremonies
and that Kimigayo is sung. In 2003, the Tokyo Metropolitan Government
Board of Education issued a circular to public school principals that they
should issue an official order against the protesting teachers, forcing
them to stand up and sing Kimigayo during ceremonial occasions. The
circular also noted that disobedience of the official order would lead to
disciplinary action. Although not expressly mentioned in the circular, the
Board of Education has a policy of issuing an “admonition” for the first


56 Saikō Saibansho [Sup. Ct.] Jan. 16, 2012, 2011 (Gyō-Tsu) 263 & 2011 (Gyō-Hi) 294,
   2417 HANREI JIHŌ [HANJI] 139 (Japan).
Functions of the Proportionality Principle in Japanese Administrative Law           233


occurrence of disobedience, “reduction of salary for one month” for the
second occurrence, “reduction of salary for six month[s]” for the third,
and “suspension from duty” for the fourth. The practice was
                                    57
“uniform . . . and automatic” . The plaintiffs were those teachers who
suffered disciplinary actions as a result of this circular.

     The plaintiffs in this case suffered from “suspension from duty”
disciplinary dispositions. They argued, among other things, that the
official order to stand up and sing was an infringement of freedom of
                                                                            58
thought and conscience (Art. 19 of the Constitution of Japan),                   but the
Supreme Court had already ruled in prior decisions that it is
                59
constitutional.      The Court ruled that the act of standing in ceremonies,
has a nature of a customary and formal behavior not inseparably
connected to the view of history or the view of the world itself, therefore
the order does not directly constrain an individual’s freedom of thought
and conscience. However, at the same time, the court also noted that
requiring a person to perform an act that has an expression of his/her
respect of certain objects that he/she negatively evaluates (Hinomaru,
Kimigayo) could be “indirect constraint” to freedom of thought and
conscience.

     It was against this backdrop that the Supreme Court Judgment on
Jan. 16, 2012 was issued. The court first refers to the prior judgment of
the court to confirm the constitutionality of the official order. It then


57 Quoted from the supplementary opinion in the Judgment written by Justice Tatsuko
   Sakurai.
58 NIHONKOKU KENPŌ [KENPŌ] [CONSTITUTION], art. 19 (Japan). Freedom of thought
   and conscience shall not be violated.
59 E.g. Saikō Saibansho [Sup. Ct.] May 30, 2011, 2010 (Gyō-Tsu) 54, 65(4) SAIKŌ
   SAIBANSHO MINJI HANREISHŪ [MINSHŪ] 1780, translated in http://www.courts.go.jp/
   app/hanrei_en/detail?id=1106 (Japan).
234                                   《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


                                         60
quotes the Kobe Customs Office Case           and other precedents in order to
show that there is administrative discretion in the choice of measures
when the disobedience took place.

      However, the court goes on to point out that the refusal to stand up
and sing brings about a contradiction between the action required by the
official order and the external conduct that originates from her/his world
views. The court also points out that mere refusal to stand up without
active disruptive conducts would not hinder the performance of the
ceremony, at least physically.

      Based on this analysis, the court makes a distinction between
“admonition” and other disciplinary measures such as salary reduction
and more severe measures such as “suspension from duty” in this case.
“Careful considerations” are required for the latter. “Suspension from
duty” dispositions shall only be allowed when concrete circumstances
are found that can serve as a basis of appropriateness of the choice of
disposition in view of balancing between the necessity of preserving
discipline and order, and disadvantages to the subject person. Mere
repetition of not standing up will not suffice for finding such concrete
circumstances.

      We can observe here an argument similar to the Jehovah’s Witness
case. The situation surrounding the plaintiffs in relation to constitutional
rights is analyzed so that “careful considerations” are required. Although
not quoting expressly, the court surely has an “indirect constraint”
argument in the prior judgment in mind. As a result, the court makes a
distinction among different disciplinary actions. It draws a line between


60 Saikō Saibansho [Sup. Ct.] Dec. 20, 1977, 1972 (Gyō-Tsu) 52, 31(7) SAIKŌ
   SAIBANSHO MINJI HANREISHŪ [MINSHŪ] 1101 (Japan).
Functions of the Proportionality Principle in Japanese Administrative Law    235


“admonition” and other more severe disciplinary measures. Here the
court establishes a general legal proposition in the balancing control,
which can be legitimately referred to as an application of the PP.

     While establishing a general legal proposition, it should also be
noted that the court also delivered a warning sign against “uniform . . .
and automatic” practice of disciplinary actions. Some authors evaluate
                                                        61
this warning sign from the perspective of the PP.

     Here we can observe two different orientations of the PP in regard
to balancing control. On the one hand, it seeks establishment of a general
legal proposition by giving priority to a certain interest. On the other
hand, the principle tries to avoid being over-inclusive by setting a
general rule and seeks an adequate judgment in individual particular
circumstances.



IV. Summary

     This essay has examined the PP, whether it functions “outside” or
“inside” of administrative discretion and whether it performs the
necessity control or the balancing control. It also builds upon the
premise that administrative discretion takes place in the process of the
application of the law in the narrower sense, distinguished from the
interpretation of law and from bare fact-finding, both of which are
reserved for the judiciary.


61 E.g. Takayoshi Tsuneoka, Shokumu Meirei Ihan ni Taisuru Chōkai Shobun to Shihō
   Shinsa (1) [Disciplinary Actions against Disobedience to an Official Order and
   Judicial Review (1)], 89(8) JICHI KENKYŪ 27, 36 (2013)（常岡孝好，職務命令違反
   に対する懲戒処分と裁量審査(1)，自治研究，89卷8号，頁36（2013年）                                 ）.
236                                       《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


      The Japanese Supreme Court employs the rhetorical formula of
“generally accepted social ideas” in the judicial control of administrative
discretion, which is sometimes understood as a loose application of the
PP. The control tends to be lax, but there is no inherent limit on the
degree to which it is applied.

      The court later integrated the “control of the judgment-making
process” method into the “generally accepted social ideas” formula. In
this method, the judiciary extracts (i) factors that must be considered, (ii)
factors that should not be considered, or (iii) factors that may be
considered depending on the circumstances as a result of legal analysis.
It may further designate weighting of factors.

      Needless to say, the core of the PP is the purpose-means
construction. Regarding necessity control, this construction is self-
evident. As for balancing control, whether the court focuses on a special
weighting of a particular interest is the issue. The feature of the PP in
balancing control is that a particular interest is placed on one side of the
                                                            62
scale and compared with various other interests.                 We have confirmed
that the Supreme Court is rather reluctant to perform such types of
dichotomic balancing, but does so in certain cases.

      Whether such balancing is appropriate depends upon a
determination of the desirable degree of judicial review, as well as an
understanding of the legal structure in the relevant field. We should be
aware that while such dichotomic balancing will provide an effective


62 Such priority of a particular interest must be derived either from the Constitution or
   from the (interpretation of) the law. See Ryuji Yamamoto, Gyōsei Sairyō no Handan
   Katei Shinsa [“Control of the Judgment-making Process” Regarding Administrative
   Discretion], 14 GYŌSEIHŌ KENKYŪ 1, 11-12 (2016)（山本隆司，行政裁量の判断
   過程審査，行政法研究，14号，頁11-12（2016年）                         ）.
Functions of the Proportionality Principle in Japanese Administrative Law   237


tool for judicial control, it also presents the risk of making the actual
diversity of interests among various stakeholders invisible. The issue of
                                                                      63
the legal governance of urban space can illustrate this risk.




63 Cf. Narufumi Kadomatsu, Legal Management of Urban Space in Japan and the Role
   of the Judiciary, in COMPARATIVE ADMINISTRATIVE LAw 497 (Susan Rose-Ackerman
   et al. eds., 2d ed. 2017).
238                               《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）




                              Reference

1. English

Kadomatsu, Narufumi. 2017. Legal Management of Urban Space in
      Japan and the Role of the Judiciary. Pp. 497-512 in Comparative
      Administrative Law, 2d ed., edited by Susan Rose-Ackerman, Peter
      L. Lindseth and Blake Emerson. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Toulmin, Stephen E. 2003. The Uses of Argument. Updated ed.
      Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

2. Japanese

Abe, Yasutaka. 1987. Gyōsei Sairyō to Gyōsei Kyūsai [Administrative
      Discretion and Administrative Remedy]. Tokyo: Sanseido.（阿部泰
      隆（1987）
            ，行政裁量と行政救済，東京：三省堂。
                             ）
Harada, Naohiko. 1974. Hanhi—Tōkyō Kōhan Shōwa 48nen 7gatu
      13nichi [Case Comment—Judgment of the Tokyo High Court, July
      13, 1973]. Jurisuto 565:41-44.（原田尚彦（1974）
                                              ，判批（東京
      高判昭和48年7月13日），ジュリスト，565号（昭和48年度重
      要判例解説）
           ，頁41-44。
                  ）
Hashimoto, Hiroyuki. 2009. Gyōsei Hanrei to Shikumi Kaishaku
      [Administrative   Law    Case    Precedents    and   Systematic
      Interpretation]. Tokyo: Kōbundō.（橋本博之（2009）
                                                ，行政判例
      と仕組み解釈，東京：弘文堂。
                   ）
Kadomatsu, Narufumi. 2014. Nihon Gyōseihō ni Okeru Hireigensoku no
      Kinō ni Kansuru Oboegaki [Memorandum on the Functions of the
      Proportionality Principle in Japanese Administrative Law].
      Seisakukagaku 21(4):191-200.（角松生史（2014），日本行政法
Functions of the Proportionality Principle in Japanese Administrative Law    239


     における比例原則の機能に関する覚え書き，政策科学，21卷
     4号，頁191-200。
                ）
─. 2016. Gyōseihō ni Okeru Hō no Kaishaku to Tekiyō ni kansuru
     Oboegaki [A Memorandum on Interpretation/Application of Law in
     Administrative Law]. Pp. 383-400 in Gendai Gyōseihō no Kōzo to
     Tenkai      [Structure      and      Development        of     Contemporary
     Administrative Law], edited by Katsuya Uga and Hisashi Kōketsu.
     Tokyo: Yūhikaku.（角松生史（2016），行政法における法の解
     釈と適用に関する覚え書き，收於：宇賀克也、交告尚史編，
     現代行政法の構造と展開，頁383-400，東京：有斐閣。
                                ）
Kobayakawa, Mitsuo. 1983. Sairyō Mondai to Hōritsu Mondai
     [Question of Discretion and Question of Law]. Pp. 331-360 in vol.
     2 of Hōgaku Kyōkai Hyakushūnen Kinen Ronbunshū [Festschrift
     for 100 Year Anniversary of the Jurisprudence Association Vol. 2].
     Tokyo: Yūhikaku.（小早川光郎（1983），裁量問題と法律問
     題，收於：法学協会編，法学協会百周年記念論文集第2卷，
     頁331-360，東京：有斐閣。
                    ）
─. 1989. Hanhi—Tōkyō Kōhan Shōwa 48nen 7gatu 13nichi [Case
     Comment—Judgment of the Tokyo High Court, July 13, 1973].
     Bessatsu Jurisuto 103:118-120.（小早川光郎（1989）
                                              ，判批（東
     京高判昭和48年7月13日），別冊ジュリスト，103号（街づく
     り・国づくり判例百選）
               ，頁118-120。
                        ）
Minobe, Tatsukichi. 1929. Gyōsei Saibanhō [Administrative Litigation
     Law]. Tokyo: Chikura-Shobo.（美濃部達吉（1929），行政裁判
     法，東京：千倉書房。
              ）
─. 1940. Nihon Gyōseihō [Japanese Administrative Law]. Tokyo:
     Yūhikaku.（美濃部達吉（1940），日本行政法，東京：有斐
     閣。
      ）
Murata, Hitoshi. 2012. Gyōseihō ni Okeru Hireigensoku [Proportionality
240                                《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）



      Principle in Administrative Law]. Pp. 79-93 in Gyōsei Sōshō
      [Administative Litigation and Administrative Appeal], revised ed.,
      edited by Masayuki Fujiyama and Hitoshi Murata. Tokyo: Seirin
      Shoin.（村田斉志（2012）
                      ，行政法における比例原則，收於：
      藤山雅行、村田斉志編，行政争訟，改訂版，頁79-93，東
      京：青林書院。
            ）
Okitsu, Yukio. 2014. §33. Pp. 661-698 in Jokai Gyōseijiken Soshōhō
      [Commentaries of Administrative Case Litigation Law], 4th ed.,
      edited by H. Minami, S. Takahashi, H. Ichimura and R. Yamamoto.
      Tokyo: Kōbundō.（興津征雄（2014），第33条，南博方、高橋
      滋、市村陽典、山本隆司編，条解行政事件訴訟法，4版，頁
      661-698，東京：弘文堂。）
Shiono, Hiroshi. 1973. Hanhi—Tōkyō Kōhan Shōwa 48nen 7gatu
      13nichi [Case Comment—Judgment of the Tokyo High Court, July
      13, 1973]. Hanrei Hyōron 178:21-25.（塩野宏（1973），判批
      （東京高判昭和48 年 7 月13 日），判例評論，178 号，頁21-
      25。）
─. 2013. Gyōseihō II [Administrative Law II]. 5th ed.
      (supplemented). Tokyo: Yūhikaku.（塩野宏（2013），行政法 II，
      5版補訂版，東京：有斐閣。）
─. 2015. Gyōseihō I [Administrative Law I]. 6th ed. Tokyo:
      Yūhikaku.（塩野宏（2015），行政法 I，6版，東京：有斐閣。）
Suto, Yoko. 2010. Hirei Gensoku no Gendaiteki Igi to Kinō
      [Contemporary Significance and Function of the Proportionality
      Principle]. Kyoto: Hōritsu Bunkasha.（須藤陽子（2010）
                                                    ，比例
      原則の現代的意義と機能，京都：法律文化社。）
Takagi, Hikaru. 2015. Gyōseihō [Administrative Law]. Tokyo: Yūhikaku.
      （高木光（2015）
               ，行政法，東京：有斐閣。）
Tsuneoka, Takayoshi. 2013. Shokumu Meirei Ihan ni Taisuru Chōkai
Functions of the Proportionality Principle in Japanese Administrative Law   241


     Shobun to Shihō Shinsa (1) [Disciplinary Actions against
     Disobedience to an Official Order and Judicial Review (1)]. Jichi
     Kenkyū 89(8):27-49.（常岡孝好（2013），職務命令違反に対す
     る懲戒処分と裁量審査(1)，自治研究，89卷8号，頁27-49。
                                    ）
Uga, Katsuya 2015. Gyōseiho Gaisetsu II [Administrative Law Text,
     vol. 2]. 5th ed. Tokyo: Yūhikaku.（宇賀克也（2015）
                                                ，行政法概
     説II，5版，東京：有斐閣。）
Watari, Tadasu. 2008. Rieki Kōryō Gata Shinsa to Hirei Gensoku
     [Judicial Review Based on Balancing of Interests and the
     Proportionality Principle]. Hōgaku Kyōshitsu 339:37-46.（亘理格
    （2008），利益衡量型司法審査と比例原則，法学教室，339
     号，頁37-46。
             ）
Yamamoto, Ryuji. 2006. Nihon ni Okeru Sairyō Ron no Henyō
     [Transformation of Discretion Doctrine in Japan]. Hanrei Jihō
     1933:11-22.（山本隆司（2006），日本における裁量論の変
     容，判例時報，1933号，頁11-22。
                        ）
─. 2012. Hanrei Kara Tankyūsuru Gyōseihō [Exploring
     Administrative Law through Judicial Precedents]. Tokyo: Yūhikaku.
    （山本隆司（2012），判例から探究する行政法，東京：有斐
     閣。
      ）
─. 2016. Gyōsei Sairyō no Handan Katei Shinsa [“Control of the
     Judgment-making Process” Regarding Administrative Discretion].
     Gyōseihō Kenkyū 14:1-24.（山本隆司（2016）
                                       ，行政裁量の判断
     過程審査，行政法研究，14号，頁1-24。
                         ）
242               《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）




       比例原則在日本行政法的功能

                 角松生史∗


                  摘要
  日本在兩次世界大戰期間，從德國引入比例原則。除了作為傍
論之外，日本最高裁判所從未明白在判決中提及比例原則。然而，
有一些判決實質上應用了比例原則。本文的主要問題是：比例原則
是否對於行政裁量的範圍內外均有所作用，以及是否進行必要性與
狹義比例原則審查。本文的論證基礎預設了行政裁量發生於行政機
關適用法律的最狹義過程中，無關乎解釋法律或發現事實的過程，
蓋後二者屬於司法審查的範疇。最高裁判所在審查行政裁量時採用
「一般社會通念」的公式，並在此一經典的公式中融入了「審查決
策過程」的概念。本文也檢視比例原則與此一審查架構的關係。關
於必要性審查，目的—手段的結構作為比例原則核心乃不證自明。
至於狹義比例原則的審查，其特色在於將特定的單一利益放在天平
的一端，與其他各式各樣的利益進行比較。最高裁判所毋寧排斥進
行這種二分式的利益衡量，但仍在特定案件中進行比較。這種衡量
是否妥適取決於司法審查的可欲程度以及對該領域中法律結構的理
解。這種二分式的衡量雖然提供司法控制一個有效的工具，但也凸
顯了一種論證上的風險：將各種利害關係人的多元利益結構變成隱
形不察。

關鍵詞：比例原則、行政裁量、控制決策過程、日本行政法。




∗   神戶大學法學院教授。
