 Article
Academia Sinica Law Journal                                                        243
Issue 22, pp. 243-296 (March 2018)


                                                                                 ＊
    Retribution and the Limits of Justice:
     Religious and Ethical Reflections on Capital Punishment

                                                     ＊＊
                              John D. Carlson


                                     Abstract
     The United States and Taiwan are among a dwindling group of
democratic polities that still retain capital punishment. While support for
the death penalty remains strong in Taiwan, American support has
declined in recent years, for both moral and practical reasons. Religious
reflection has been instrumental in shaping public opinion on both sides
of the U.S. debate. So, it is valuable to consider the religious
underpinnings of key moral arguments for and against capital
punishment. This article critiques certain religious positions that either
exceed the limits of justice or fail to achieve the central purposes of
punishment. Between these two poles, I chart a middle path called
limited justice that takes seriously retentionist arguments about retribution


＊  Submission Date: May 31, 2013; Acceptance Date: August 28, 2014. [Line Editor:
   Wan-Ling Teng].
   An early version of this article was delivered at Academia Sinica’s Institutum
   Iurisprudentiae, Taipei, Taiwan in October, 2012. I am grateful to Jimmy Chia-Shin
   Hsu, Matthew Kramer, Matt Matravers, and the many other participants whose
   questions and comments proved helpful in revising this article. I also thank two
   anonymous reviewers and members of the journal’s staff for their constructive
   feedback. Erin Schulte and Hsin-I Yeh provided exceptional support in helping to
   prepare the final version.
＊＊ John D. Carlson is Associate Professor of Religious Studies at Arizona State
   University where he is also Interim Director of the Center for the Study of Religion
   and Conflict.
   Online: http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/80208181.pdf.
244                                  《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


while considering death penalty opponents’ concerns about errors in the
capital justice system. Limited justice presumes that capital punishment
is neither morally required nor morally prohibited. Drawing upon an
account of general retribution—an approach in which society as a whole,
not the individual victim or offender, takes center stage—limited justice
considers how a political society compels an offender to pay a “tribute”
for his or her crimes. In so doing, society itself honors and reaffirms its
defining values such as its commitment to human dignity, which
exceptionally heinous crimes violate. I conclude that, under limited
circumstances, capital punishment can be a compelling means for
vindicating such public values. To make this argument, the article draws
upon several Protestant perspectives and theological ideas, critiquing
certain approaches while affirming others. This approach offers a case
study of how religious reasoning and ethical reflection can inform and
enliven public debate about this vexing moral issue.

KEYWORDS: death penalty, retribution, justice, punishment, religion and
          public life, Protestant ethics, Christian ethics, uses of the
          law, John Witte Jr., C.S. Lewis, Oliver O’Donovan.


                                 Contents

 I.   Introduction
 II.  Thinking through the Concrete
 III. Individual Desert and Retribution
 IV.  Human Fallibility and Judicial Error
 V.   The Moral Limits of Justice and Punishment
      A. Ultimate Justice
      B. Nominal Justice
      C. Charting a Middle Path
 VI. Retribution and the Moral Order of Political Life
 VII. Limited Justice and Limited Punishment
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                                  245


I. Introduction

      Taiwan shares with the United States the dubious distinction of
being one of the few remaining democracies that still practices capital
punishment. Abolished throughout much of the world, the practice is
retained in only sixty or so nations, which places the United States and
Taiwan in a dwindling and unenviable lot among authoritarian countries
                                                       1
such as China, Iran, and Saudi Arabia.                     Nevertheless, the United
States—and any democratic country that practices capital punishment—
should be distinguished from these death penalty countries by its strong
commitments to human rights and the rule of law, an independent
judiciary, an extensive appeals process, and overall transparency
surrounding the practice. Another distinction crucial to democratic
societies is that controversial practices are accompanied by open dissent
and vigorous public debate, facilitated by a free press and other
independent institutions of civil society. To be sure, the debate over
capital punishment within the United States is very much alive, making
it a pertinent case to explore in the context of the debate about capital
punishment in Taiwan.

      Americans’ support for capital punishment has varied over the last
seventy-five years. It has been as high as 78% in the 1990s and as low as
42% in the 1960s. In 1936, it was about the same as it was in 2010 with



1   Other democratic countries that retain the death penalty include India, Indonesia, Iraq,
    Japan, Malaysia, and Nigeria. According to Amnesty International, three countries—
    Iran, Pakistan, and Saudi Arabia—report carrying out the greatest number of
    executions in 2015. China still carries out thousands of executions every year—more
    than any other country—but does not make its records public. See AMNESTY
    INTERNATIONAL, DEATH SENTENCES AND EXECUTIONS 2015, at 3-4 (2016),
    https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/act50/3487/2016/en/.
246                                        《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


about 60% of Americans supporting capital punishment for persons
convicted of murder. In 2016, though, only 49% of Americans supported
                                       2
the practice, and 42% opposed it. In Taiwan, by comparison, support is
on the rise with about 80% of Taiwanese citizens favoring the death
                                  3
penalty (up 10% from 2012). As of May 2017, capital punishment was
legal in thirty-one U.S. states as well as the U.S. military and federal
justice system; it has been outlawed in nineteen states and Washington,
      4
D.C. In spite of consistent American support for capital punishment,
there has been a steadily growing and rather strong movement against
capital punishment. This opposition movement has been fueled by a
good number of religious individuals, groups, and denominations,
including Catholics and evangelicals, many of whom have been
rethinking and revising their traditionally retentionist views on the
                            5
practice in recent years.

      The entire debate over capital punishment in the United States (and


2 See Public Opinion on the Death Penalty, PEW RES. CTR. (Sept. 23, 2011), http://pew
  forum.org/Death-Penalty/Public-Opinion-on-the-Death-Penalty.aspx; Baxter Oliphant,
  Support for Death Penalty Lowest in More than Four Decades, PEW RES. CTR. (Sept.
  29, 2016), http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/09/29/support-for-death-penalty-
  lowest-in-more-than-four-decades/.
3 See Owen Bowcott, A Fight to the Death: Stopping the Death Penalty in Taiwan, THE
  GUARDIAN (Oct. 3, 2016), https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/03/death-
  penalty-capital-punishment-taiwan; Cindy Sui, Death Penalty Dilemma Dividing
  Taiwan, BBC NEWS (June 4, 2012), http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-18202396.
4 Facts about the Death Penalty, DEATH PENALTY INFO. CTR. (May 17, 2017),
  https://deathpenaltyinfo.org/documents/FactSheet.pdf.
5 For a careful, highly detailed, though not unassailable, articulation of Catholic
  opposition to capital punishment, see E. CHRISTIAN BRUGGER, CAPITAL PUNISHMENT
  AND ROMAN CATHOLIC MORAL TRADITION (2003). For evangelical abolitionist
  perspectives, see, e.g., GLENN H. STASSEN & DAVID P. GUSHEE, KINGDOM ETHICS:
  FOLLOWING JESUS IN CONTEMPORARY CONTEXT (2003); Michael L. Westmoreland-
  White & Glenn H. Stassen, Biblical Perspectives on the Death Penalty, in RELIGION
  AND THE DEATH PENALTY: A CALL FOR RECKONING 123, 123-38 (Erik C. Owens, John
  D. Carlson & Eric P. Elshtain eds., 2004).
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                            247


Western history more broadly) is informed by profound religious
concerns as they intersect various moral, political, and practical
                  6
considerations. Twenty percent of Americans cite religion as the most
important factor influencing their views on capital punishment. About
one-third (32%) of death penalty opponents cite religion as the chief
reason for their views. By contrast, only 13% of those who support
                                                                  7
capital punishment do so primarily for religious reasons. Death penalty
proponents often point to scriptural passages (e.g., Romans 13) and
longstanding moral tradition as evidence that the practice is consistent
with religious teachings—morally permitted or even authorized by God.
Opponents, meanwhile, appeal to forgiveness, mercy, and a reticence to
judge. After all, isn’t that what Jesus did (e.g., John 8) and asked his
followers to do likewise? While some have suggested that capital
punishment is more at home in religious than in secular societies, current
U.S. views also show that strong religious commitments are no
guarantee of support for the death penalty.

      In this essay, I consider some of the religious reasoning behind each
side’s perspective in this debate, attending to key moral concerns they
bring to light as well as problems with certain positions. Mindful that
this article appears in an Asian law journal, I should clarify that when I
speak of religion, I will not be discussing Daoism, Buddhism,
Confucianism or other religions prominent in Asia that have not figured
centrally in death penalty debates in the United States. Perhaps, however,


6 For a comprehensive and monumental treatment of religion and the death penalty, see
  JAMES J. MEGIVERN, THE DEATH PENALTY: AN HISTORICAL AND THEOLOGICAL
  SURVEY (1997).
7 See, e.g., Few Say Religion Shapes Immigration, Environment Views, PEW RES. CTR.
  (Sept. 17, 2010), http://www.pewforum.org/2010/09/17/few-say-religion-shapes-
  immigration-environment-views/.
248                                       《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


the approach and model of civic reflection I offer here may have utility
for those wishing to bring the resources, practices, or lessons of Asian
religions to bear on death penalty questions in Taiwan. In this article, my
discussion of “religion” will center on different Christian (especially
Protestant) perspectives          on    capital punishment. Perhaps              more
importantly, my scholarly use of, and approach, to religion demonstrates
the value of tradition-informed reasoning that can be found not only
among Christians in the United States but in Judaism, Islam, and other
religious traditions. Finally, while I will focus on religious arguments,
they should be viewed as analogues to, or even variants of, secular moral
reasoning. As there is often considerable continuity and overlap, it can
be difficult—perhaps impossible and even unnecessary—to draw bright
lines that separate religious from secular forms of ethical reflection.
Even citizens who hold diverse religious commitments can find wisdom
                                                         8
in one another’s moral traditions and reasoning.

      Two central moral concerns I explore in this article—the retributive
function of capital punishment and the possible execution of innocents—
are neither distinctly secular nor religious concerns. What is crucial for
moral debate on the death penalty—and to ethically informed reflection
on political life generally (whether “religious” or “secular”)—is the task
of sketching out certain parameters of debate. Thus, I will circumscribe
some limits to justice and punishment—moral limits we do well to
discern and heed—before exploring a middle path that I call limited
justice, which draws upon religious traditions and ideas to inform and



8   For an array of different Christian, Jewish, and Muslim positions that showcases the
    diverse ways that religion informs death penalty perspectives, see, e.g., ERIK C.
    OWENS, JOHN D. CARLSON & ERIC P. ELSHTAIN EDS., RELIGION AND THE DEATH
    PENALTY: A CALL FOR RECKONING (2004).
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                     249


advance the contemporary debate. I then offer an abbreviated defense of
the communal dimensions of retribution, situated under the rubric of
limited justice. As retribution offers the sturdiest justification for capital
punishment, this principle becomes the basis for retaining or retiring the
practice.



II. Thinking through the Concrete

      Rather than diving headfirst into the deep end of the theological
pool, so to speak, let me wade in gradually by offering some context and
preliminary discussion to acclimate readers, especially those outside the
United States, to some of the moral arguments over capital punishment.
Abstract philosophies of punishment are helpfully clarified when
grounded in concrete circumstances. I begin, then, with a widely
publicized case in the United States that displays some practical
concerns relevant to the moral debate over the death penalty. The
example also reveals how religion, particularly a Judeo-Christian
backdrop, sets the social and political context. The case involves the
Petit family of Cheshire, Connecticut whose home was invaded one
morning in 2007. The two intruders carried out egregious acts of
breaking and entering, armed robbery, extortion, and kidnapping. These
transgressions—serious violations in their own right—were just the
beginning, and they pale in comparison to the physical violence the
offenders carried out against the victims. They beat the father with a
baseball bat; raped and strangled the mother; tied the two daughters
(ages 11 and 17) to their beds, sexually assaulting and then
photographing the youngest; and, finally, doused the victims and their
beds with gasoline before setting fire to them to destroy the evidence of
250                                        《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


their horrible misdeeds. The father, William Petit, was left for dead. He
managed to escape only to learn later that his whole family had died—a
fate he claimed was worse than death. If there were prizes for the
greatest number or severity of different crimes committed in a single
spree, the offenders in this case would be record-earners. Indeed, the
crimes were so gruesome, the evidence before the court so ghastly, that,
for the first time in its history, the state offered counseling services to
                                                                                        9
jurors struggling with post-traumatic stress resulting from the trial itself.

      The jury concluded that these odious crimes merited the “ultimate
punishment,” an apt colloquialism for the most serious and completely
irreversible sanction available under the U.S. Constitution and practiced
in the State of Connecticut’s penal system. This was a decision, polls
suggest, that most Americans would support. Religious sentiments
appear frequently in capital cases such as this (notwithstanding the
legendary separation of church and state that defines the American legal
system), and they serve to reinforce the moral authority and gravamen of
the proceedings. When the jury handed down its verdict to the first
defendant in the Petit slayings, the father averred, “I believe God’s will
                      10
has been done.”            In the second trial, Mr. Petit located capital
punishment within a vaster context: “This is a verdict for justice . . . .
The defendant faces far more serious punishment from the Lord than he
                                    11
can ever face from mankind.”             Even the judge’s words to the defendant


9  Randall Beach, Conn. Judicial Branch Offers Hayes Jurors Post-Trauma Assistance,
   NEW HAVEN REGISTER (Nov. 10, 2010, 12:00 AM), http://www.nhregister.com/news/
   article/Conn-judicial-branch-offers-Hayes-jurors-11601181.php.
10 William Glaberson, Death Sentence for 2nd Man Brings Gruesome Connecticut
   Murder Case to a Close, N. Y. TIMES, Dec. 10, 2011, at A19.
11 William Glaberson, Death Penalty for a Killer of 3 in Connecticut, N. Y. TIMES (Nov. 9,
   2010), http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9E0CE7DF1139F93AA35752
   C1A9669D8B63.
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                               251


suggests that death row serves as a kind of antechamber to some other
realm not fully of this earth: “This is a terrible sentence, but it is in truth
a sentence you wrote for yourself in flames . . . . Your fate is now in the
                                                                  12
hands of others. May God have mercy on your soul.”

      Interestingly, however, just months after this high-profile trial,
voters in Connecticut voted to abolish capital punishment. What kind of
reasoning was behind this decision? Were the citizens of Connecticut
insufficiently outraged by the Cheshire killings to retain this instrument
of justice? Were they no longer convinced that their state should be an
agent of God’s justice? Did the threat of “ultimate punishment”
somehow suddenly seem to tread upon or transgress citizens’ views of
the limits of justice? It seems that the people of Connecticut actually
made their decision on rather modest, prudential grounds involving the
significant     expense,       lengthy      appeals      process,      and     general
                                                             13
“unworkability” of the state capital justice system.

      This case raises intriguing concerns about weighing practical versus
moral-philosophical rationales for retaining or abolishing capital
punishment. Specifically, what is the proper relationship between ethics
and pragmatism? Should one trump the other? It is worth noting this
confluence of pragmatic and moral concerns have been part of the death


12 William Glaberson, ‘I Destroyed Innocent Lives,’ Cheshire Killer Says, N. Y. TIMES
   (Dec. 2, 2010), http://www.nytimes.com/2010/12/03/nyregion/03cheshire.html.
13 Governor Dannell Malloy cited “unworkability” as the reason for the voters’ decision
   to outlaw it. “In the last 52 years, only two people have been put to death in
   Connecticut—and both of them volunteered for it,” Malloy said. “Instead, the people
   of this state pay for appeal after appeal, and then watch time and again as defendants
   are marched in front of the cameras, giving them a platform of public attention they
   don’t deserve.” See David Ariosto, Connecticut Becomes 17th State to Abolish Death
   Penalty, CNN (Apr. 25, 2012), http://www.cnn.com/2012/04/25/justice/connecticut-
   death-penalty-law-repealed/.
252                                      《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


penalty debate in the United States for many years. Death penalty critics
have pointed to racial discrimination, unfair trials, and coerced
confessions as leading reasons for ending the practice or at least
imposing moratoria. Most recently, the shortage of drugs used in lethal
injections has delayed executions and encouraged states to experiment
                                                                           14
with alternatives that can cause considerable pain and suffering.

      There are clearly moral implications to all of these practical
concerns, for they erode the putative justice that criminal trials and
sentencing pledge to offer. But they are not primarily arguments about
the moral justifiability of capital punishment in principle; that is,
effective reforms could address many practical objections that leave the
                                   15
moral questions unresolved.             The reality is that the overwhelming
majority of Americans who support capital punishment do so for one
simple moral reason—because, they say, it is the appropriate punishment
that offenders deserve for the grave crimes they have committed.
Similarly, many abolitionists oppose capital punishment in all cases even
when the system proves to be fair. This suggests that many Americans
still believe that moral arguments outweigh pragmatic concerns.

      As a scholar of religious and political ethics, I focus here on the
moral debate, leaving prudential considerations to journalists, lawyers,


14 See, e.g., Erik Eckholm & John Schwartz, Timeline Describes Frantic Scene at
   Execution, N. Y. TIMES, May 2, 2014, at A1; Erik Eckholm, Arizona Takes Nearly 2
   Hours to Execute Inmate, N. Y. TIMES (July 23, 2014), https://www.nytimes.com/
   2014/07/24/us/arizona-takes-nearly-2-hours-to-execute-inmate.html. Adam Liptak,
   Arkansas’s Legal Saga Illustrates Problems with Death Penalty, N. Y. TIMES (Apr. 20,
   2017), https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/20/us/arkansas-death-penalty-executions.
   html.
15 Of course, practical considerations can cut the other way, too. Consider the 15% of
   American retentionists who support the death penalty for fiscal reasons—because
   they think prisons are too expensive or overcrowded.
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                             253


activists, and those who study the criminal justice system. But I do not
claim that deep moral reasoning should serve as the exclusive basis for
settling whether capital punishment is retained or abolished. I say that
because, having studied the problem carefully, I have come to the view
that capital punishment is neither morally required nor morally
prohibited. So, does this mean that prudence alone ought to carry the
day? Not exactly. But just as practical considerations can and should
shape the deliberative and decision-making process, there also should be
strong moral arguments that underwrite or accompany these prudential
judgments. To abdicate either prudential reasoning or deep moral
analysis denies crucial features of what make us human—enduring
facets of our nature as well as evolving aspects of our cultural contexts.

      So, what are the arguments for and against the death penalty? That
is question to which religious and secular traditions of moral reasoning
have provided a range of answers. I take up below two significant moral
concerns shaping contemporary debates about the death penalty.



III. Individual Desert and Retribution

      Among religious and secular viewpoints alike, retribution remains
the most common and perhaps compelling reason to support capital
punishment. Fifty-three percent of retentionists claim that the death
penalty is the appropriate, fitting, and deserved penalty for severe crimes
                   16
such as murder.         Execution is a forceful way for a polity and people to


16 Pew Research Center, Continued Majority Support for Death Penalty: More Concern
   among Opponents about Wrongful Convictions (Jan. 6, 2012), at 2, http://www.people-
   press.org/files/legacy-pdf/1-6-12%20Death%20penalty%20release.pdf.
254                                《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


articulate its commitment to justice—to doing what justice requires. But
what does this mean exactly? The idea that justice requires someone to
be punished simply begs the question: In what (or whom?) does justice
consist that makes punishment a moral requirement? Is justice like God
or a god who, by divine edict, commands punishment in order to be
placated? Or, to put this into a secular frame, why exactly must the
scales of justice be balanced?

      Usually, the retributive rationale goes something like this: An
individual who has committed a terrible evil deserves to be punished;
retribution compels an offender to repay the debt he or she owes to
society. In cases of heinous crimes—premeditated homicide with
exceptional cruelty, mass murder, or terrorism—a sentence of death
seems richly deserved or even necessary. But if punishment is primarily
a matter of desert—of strictly rendering one one’s due—then death by,
say, lethal injection actually might be less than what is deserved for the
cruelties carried out by those such as the Cheshire killers. To balance the
scales, shouldn’t these criminals experience greater suffering before
being put to death, perhaps closer to the kind they inflicted on their
victims? What of infamous mass murderers or terrorists such as
Oklahoma City Bomber Timothy McVeigh whose 1995 attack killed 168
people, including 19 children? Or Khaled Sheikh Mohammad who
planned the attacks of September 11, 2001 that killed thousands and
brought down the World Trade Center? Or white supremacist Dylann
Roof who during a 2015 prayer service killed nine people in an African
American church in Charleston, South Carolina. How can the death of
one heinous perpetrator possibly “repay” a debt or be considered just
recompense for the awful deaths of so many innocent victims? The
sentence of a comparatively more painless death seems quantitatively
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                  255


and qualitatively unsatisfying. Perhaps a society hell-bent on exacting
the lex taliones would propose bringing an offender to within a breath of
his life only to revive him or patch him up so that he can be nearly put to
death again—a process that could be replayed for each victim.

      Thankfully, most readers do not live in societies bent on creating
hell out of their judicial systems through cruel forms of punishment. We
understand that “an eye for an eye” is a call for proportionate—not
equivalent—punishment. We use the scales of justice as a symbol—an
ideal—not an actual working instrument by which we measure out flesh
by the pound. Moreover, we recognize that retribution in civil societies
entails more than simply individual desert. Retribution gives the
offender what he or she deserves as a means of acknowledging, restoring,
reinforcing, and honoring the moral values of the community that the
offender’s crime has violated. The community compels the offender to
pay tribute to these values, but in so doing the community also pays
tribute to them.

      Justice and punishment also entail weighing multiple, at times
conflicting, goals and concerns: concerns for public safety, moral
rehabilitation, and the chance to make amends; checks and protections
that limit the arbitrary power of the state or that correct for judicial
systems that err; values such as human dignity, moral equality, and
fairness for all; and sentencing limits that preserve the humanity of
victims, offenders, corrections officials, and citizens alike. Ordering and
negotiating these different aims is something undertaken by the
community not simply for the sake of the offender or victim but for all
its members. In other words, punishment is never simply about the
individual offender getting what he or she deserves (or about the
individual victim or family member “getting justice”) but about the
256                                        《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


community that punishes: the values it cherishes, the virtues and
dispositions it instills within citizens, and the institutions by which those
values and virtues are manifested and preserved. These moral goals and
values are paid a tribute and vindicated in the course of punishing others.

      When individual desert becomes an over-determined reason for
punishment, its moral justification becomes self-referential, often
fostering excessive zeal. The desire to punish someone because “he
needs to be punished” collapses into the desire to punish someone
severely “because he needs to be punished severely.” But why does
someone need to be punished at all, let alone severely? To punish
someone “because he deserves it”—absent a deeper understanding of the
communal dimensions of punishment (especially of retribution)—
devolves into shorthand for desiring an offender to suffer. As Jean
Hampton notes, “traditional retributivists have insisted that retribution is
an idea which does have justificatory force in and of itself: that
wrongdoers deserve to suffer is supposed to be a good reason for
                    17
inflicting harm.”        There is good reason to worry that this retributive
approach—in which the simple duty to punish exists apart from the
moral ends it achieves—verges too closely upon revenge. Drawing on
Kant’s concern about the “inner viciousness” that can lurk even within
morally upright souls, moral philosopher Jeffrie Murphy warns “that it is
probably wise not to be too charmed by such retributive slogans as
‘giving them what they deserve’ and not to be too enthusiastic in the
                                                                    18
belief that one is on a righteous retributive crusade.”                  In sum, then,



17 This quote is taken from Jean Hampton’s classic discussion of “the retributive idea” in
   JEFFRIE G. MURPHY & JEAN HAMPTON, FORGIVENESS AND MERCY 118 (1988).
18 See, e.g., Jeffrie G. Murphy, Legal Moralism and Retribution Revisited, 80(2) PROC.
   & ADDRESSES AM. PHIL. ASS’N 45, 59 (2006).
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                               257


giving the offender what he deserves does not explain why a particular
punitive sanction must be delivered as part of what justice requires or
                                    19
how this differs from revenge.

      To be clear, individual desert remains an indispensable requirement
of punishment that is central to a community’s commitment to justice.
To punish someone who is undeserving is the consummate injustice. But
a singular, overly moralistic emphasis upon individual desert yields a
very partial conception of punishment and inadequate defense of capital
punishment. When propped up by religious tradition, such thinking may
reinforce a facile divine command ethic in which God’s justice can only
be satisfied through execution. Reducing justice and punishment to
desert also neglects other goals and goods of punishment that a more
thoroughgoing communal account of punishment recognizes. I will
return later to offer a sturdier account of retribution, which remains the
most compelling defense of capital punishment. For now, suffice it to say,
individual desert is a necessary but insufficient rationale for punishment
generally and the death penalty in particular.


19 Hampton, for her part, distinguishes vengeance—a retaliatory act that elevates a
   victim’s status in order to show the inferior status of the offender—from retribution
   that represents the community’s symbolic annulment of the offender’s act (not the
   offender himself). Retribution serves as an expression of moral truth not simply about
   the victim but about the equality of human worth of all members of society (victim,
   offender, and other citizens). On this account, revenge undermines the human worth
   of the offender, just as a crime undermines the victim’s worth. Punishment, however,
   seeks to extend “equal justice” and equal worth to all.
   To that end, retribution militates against some persons being treated as having less
   worth than others. For example, crimes should be punished equally regardless of the
   victim’s race. Even the evil actions of offenders does not degrade their worth as
   human beings, thus protecting them against certain abhorrent practices. In annulling
   the crime—not the offender—retribution differs from revenge by upholding equal
   human worth as an underlying principle. See MURPHY & HAMPTON, supra note 17, at
   122-43.
258                                     《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）



IV. Human Fallibility and Judicial Error

      Perhaps the strongest reason for opposing capital punishment in the
United States today is the potential for executing an innocent—a mistake
the state can never adequately correct. While some may view this as a
practical matter, it is central to the moral debate as well. Many death
penalty abolitionists (16%) claim that the most important reason they
oppose capital punishment is an unwillingness to render a judgment that,
they believe, belongs to God. This view lines up alongside another
growing reason for opposing capital punishment: over the last decade,
the number of people who believe that playing God has landed innocents
on death row has risen from 11% to 27%. Depending upon how one
factors in other concerns about fairness in capital cases, some 46% of
opponents worry that the state is exceeding its mandate—whether in
                                         20
theory, in theology, or in practice.          Exhibit A is the State of Illinois
where widespread errors plagued the capital justice system at the turn of
the century, resulting in a 50% reversal rate. In the governor’s own
words, “[T]he chance of executing the wrong person in Illinois was like
                     21
the flip of a coin.”      Thus before leaving office, Governor George Ryan
pardoned four innocent death row inmates and concluded he had no
choice but to impose a moratorium on the death penalty and commute
164 sentences to life imprisonment, effectively emptying death row.
Several years later, under a different governor, Illinois formally
abolished capital punishment altogether.

20 This total does not include another 27% of opponents who simply believe it is
   immoral or “not our right” to execute someone. See Pew Research Center, supra note
   16.
21 See George H. Ryan, Reflections on the Death Penalty and the Moratorium, in
   RELIGION AND THE DEATH PENALTY: A CALL FOR RECKONING 221, 226 (Erik C.
   Owens, John D. Carlson & Eric P. Elshtain eds., 2004).
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                               259


      More recently, high profile cases in Georgia, Texas, and other states
have raised serious questions among citizens as to whether the state
actually has executed innocent men. If true, such a consummate injustice
would be the ironic outcome of the sublime pursuit of justice—of giving
society’s worst offenders what they deserve. In one columnist’s words,
“Opposing the death penalty is not rooted simply in the pursuit of justice
but, perhaps more firmly, in understanding the world’s fundamental
injustice and the ease with which an attempt to permanently balance the
                                                    22
scales ultimately imbalances them further.”              To my knowledge, no U.S.
state or federal government entity has offered conclusive evidence that
innocents actually have been executed—at least nothing that compares
with the high profile case of 21-year old Chiang Kuo-ching who was
wrongly accused and executed in Taiwan in 1997 for raping and killing a
five-year-old girl. Nevertheless, it could have happened in the United
States, too. No society should be complacent about carefully
investigating, reforming, and where necessary suspending or even
abolishing the death penalty when such errors occur and erode the
public’s trust. If innocents are languishing on death row—or even widely
and credibly thought to be—it threatens the moral authority and integrity
of the legal process, undermining even the strongest moral arguments for
                       23
capital punishment.



22 See, e.g., Ta-Nehisi Coates, The Haunting of Rick Perry, N. Y. TIMES (June 22, 2011),
   http://www.nytimes.com/2011/06/23/opinion/23coates.html.
23 Despite stark battle lines in the American death penalty debate, there have been
   successful initiatives in recent years in which death penalty opponents and supporters
   worked closely on practical measures to bring needed changes to the capital justice
   system. Such reforms included recording interrogations; more carefully reviewing
   evidence that is admitted at trial (DNA evidence, testimony of jailhouse snitches,
   etc.); and regulating the quality of defense attorneys. This is an area where real
   cooperation and progress can and should continue by those on fundamentally different
260                                    《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


      It may be tempting to conceive errors in the justice system or
needed reforms as matters of technical implementation. But we should
remember there are deep moral dimensions to these practical concerns as
well. We know that human knowledge is frail and that human reasoning
can be flawed. For these reasons, societies retaining the death penalty are
obliged to adhere to higher standards of moral certitude than “beyond a
reasonable doubt”—a level of confidence on which we would be willing
to risk not simply someone else’s life but perhaps even our own. When
reviewing the cases involving innocents on death row, it is clear that
somewhere, something—or someone—went deeply wrong. This
demonstrates that those participating in the justice system can be wrong
even when they honestly believe and claim to be right. This is to say
nothing of cases involving misconduct or malfeasance as also has
occurred. These realities owe to human finitude—the limits of
knowledge, failures of the will, and the tendency to rationalize human
action by deceiving oneself and others—in other words, problems that
can only be described adequately in moral-anthropological terms.

      Having said all that, it also must be noted that in the case of the
Petit Family killers, there never were any credible doubts about the
offenders’ guilt. As with many high profile cases, such as the Cheshire
killings, the Charleston church shootings, and the Oklahoma City
bombing, the accused themselves did not deny their crimes. Some




   sides of this issue. See THE CONSTITUTION PROJECT, MANDATORY JUSTICE: EIGHTEEN
   REFORMS TO THE DEATH PENALTY (2001), http://www.constitutionproject.org/wp-
   content/uploads/2012/08/MandatoryJustice.pdf; THE CONSTITUTION PROJECT,
   IRREVERSIBLE ERROR: RECOMMENDED REFORMS FOR PREVENTING AND CORRECTING
   ERRORS IN THE ADMINISTRATION OF CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (2014), http://www.
   constitutionproject.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/Irreversible-Error_FINAL.pdf.
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                          261


                                                              24
reports claim they even welcomed their sentences.                  At best, then,
concerns about moral certitude proffer reasons to restrict capital
punishment to very limited cases—not to eliminate it altogether.

                *            *          *            *             *

      This discussion has shown that moral deliberation on capital
punishment entails both philosophical and practical concerns that, at
times, mingle freely together. Both sets of concerns should be integrated
into this fraught debate. At some point, though, the value of pragmatic
concerns comes up short, whereupon we must tap into conceptual
resources of moral philosophy, theological ethics, and political theory to
deepen our civic reflection. Consideration of retribution, on one hand,
and human fallibility and judicial error, present what I take to be the
most crucial moral concerns that ought to frame conceptual deliberations
about the future of the death penalty. These concerns reemerge in the
religious positions I explore below as well as the argument I ultimately
put forward myself—a position that requires supplementing these initial
discussions of desert and individual retribution with a more organic and
communal account of general retribution.

      I also have suggested and will show further how religious forms of
reasoning can inform secular debate on this issue. The governor of
Illinois appreciated the moral and religious dimensions of his office
when, in imposing a moratorium on capital punishment, he cited Exodus
23:6-7, wherein God tells Moses “You shall not pervert justice . . . do not
kill the innocent and those in the right for I will not acquit the guilty.”


24 See, e.g., Associated Press, Killer of Mom, 2 Daughters Gets Death Sentence, NBC
   NEWS (Nov. 8, 2010, 5:49:48 PM), http://www.nbcnews.com/id/40071693/ns/us_
   news-crime_and_courts#.VsIgEq32app.
262                                         《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


This is not to say the governor’s policy was driven only or primarily by
religious concerns. As in many cases, religious and secular arguments
about capital punishment (and other issues) often overlap and
complement one another. Religious ideas suffuse secular reasoning as
                                                                       25
much as secular ideas invite religious interpretations.                     Compatibility
between these different forms of moral reasoning can be revealing and
instructive—a view that challenges rigid secularists who presume that
religious perspectives should be sidelined from public or political
         26
debate.

      I turn now to some religious thinkers whose positions provide poles
between which we can chart a middle path that advances the death
penalty debate. Working through these arguments and limit cases, I come
to a position called limited justice that can be defended on both religious
and secular grounds.



V. The Moral Limits of Justice and Punishment

      One way of charting a path forward on a controversial topic is to
establish some perimeters of moral debate. I draw here from an approach


25 My colleague Jeffrie G. Murphy reminds us, “When a person brought up a Christian
   becomes an atheist, he tends to become a Christian atheist. The questions he chooses
   to make central and many of the answers that tempt him are framed, even if he does
   not realize it, by the very set of beliefs he claims to reject.” Murphy also speaks out of
   his experience as an atheist-turned-believer in defense of Christian concepts of
   neighbor love. See Jeffrie G. Murphy, Christian Love and Criminal Punishment, in
   CHRISTIANITY AND LAW: AN INTRODUCTION 219 (John Witte, Jr. & Frank S.
   Alexander, eds. 2008).
26 For an extended consideration of this topic, see John D. Carlson, Defending the
   Secular from Its Secularist Critics: Albert Camus, Saint Augustine, and the New
   Atheism, 97 SOUNDINGS 50, 50-74 (2014).
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                          263


developed more fully elsewhere as the upper and lower limits of
           27
justice.        This necessarily abridged discussion explores illustrative
configurations of how the upper and lower moral limits of punishment
can be conceived and how the intermediary terrain between excess and
deficiency might be negotiated. Specifically, this argument navigates
between those who say capital punishment is a moral imperative—
something we must do under certain circumstances—and those who
conversely claim that capital punishment is morally impermissible,
something we cannot do under any circumstance. I begin with an
illustration of the former position, what I will call ultimate justice.

A. Ultimate Justice
      Religious Americans who support capital punishment may find
compelling the views of a Christian evangelical scholar who makes a
retributivist argument grounded in the bible. Drawing upon the universal
covenant that God establishes with Noah after the flood, Daryl Charles
proclaims, “An assault on human life is comparable, as it were, to an
                         28
assault against God.”         Invoking Gen 9:6 (“Whoever sheds the blood of
man, by man shall his blood be shed; for God made man in his own
image.”), Charles reasons, “It is precisely because the human being is
the image of God that one who purposely sheds the blood of another
must die.” There is no ambiguity here: “The core of the covenant with
Noah is a moral imperative formulated in no uncertain terms, namely the
                                                                               29
institution of a life-for-life policy in the case of premeditated murder.”

27 See John D. Carlson, Human Nature, Limited Justice, and the Irony of Capital
   Punishment, in RELIGION AND THE DEATH PENALTY: A CALL FOR RECKONING 158
   (Erik C. Owens, John D. Carlson & Eric P. Elshtain eds., 2004).
28 See, e.g., J. Daryl Charles, Crime, the Christian, and Capital Justice, 38 J.
   EVANGELICAL THEOLOGICAL SOC’Y 429, 440 (1995).
29 J. Daryl Charles, Outrageous Atrocity or Moral Imperative? The Ethics of Capital
264                                      《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


      Capital punishment on this reading serves to defend, vindicate, or
restore the image of God and the God-bestowed human dignity that is
besmirched by murder: “desecration of life’s sanctity should be—indeed
                                                                    30
must be—visited by divine judgment in the present life.”                 It should be
noted that the offender, too, is endowed with God’s image and the
dignity this image bestows. But such dignity as the offender possesses
entails not only great worth but also free will, responsibility, and the duty
                          31
to obey the moral law.         Thus when offender violates a victim, it is the
violation of the moral law and the desecration of human dignity that
cries out for a response: punishment as a way of reaffirming or restoring
the human dignity the offender has assaulted.

      I dub this position “ultimate justice” for two reasons. First, it
captures the position’s own terms and aspirations, which holds that the
                                                                                   32
law must retain “what only a conviction of ultimacy can bestow.”
Charles avers that “atonement for capital crimes is not pushed off into
the eschaton. Rather, criminal justice is to serve as a (present) shadow of
                         33
eternal punishment.”           From a Christian theological point of view,
though, such claims seem problematic. Charles surely does not presume
to know whether someone—even a heinous murderer—is destined for
eternal punishment. Nor does the legal system presume to know that
criminal punishment foreshadows eternal punishment or damnation,
hence the judge’s ambivalent words that attend the sentencing: “May



   Punishment, 6(2) STUD. CHRISTIAN ETHICS 1, 11 (1993).
30 Id.
31 Animals, in contrast to human beings, are not punished. They may be put down to
   prevent further harm, but they do not violate some dignity-endowing feature that is
   essential to the moral essence of their nature.
32 See Charles, supra note 29, at 5.
33 See Charles, supra note 28, at 435 n.20.
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                      265


God have mercy on your soul.” Indeed, it may very well be that a just
execution (ultimately) ushers in a forgiven criminal’s salvation. If,
though, as Charles suggests, God means for society to execute criminals
as atonement for their crimes, this claim raises other theological
questions. Some may understandably ask, For what reason, then, did
Christ die upon the cross? In the words of New Testament scholar
Christopher Marshall, “It is one thing to see capital punishment as a debt
owed to human society; it is another to see it as an atonement offered to
God for a sin already atoned for at the cross and freely forgiven by
       34
God.”       Within the frame of ultimate justice, whether execution brings
about an offender’s eternal punishment or salvation, the earthly sentence
of capital punishment accrues moral justification for its relation to, and
initiation of, divine activity.

      There is a second reason the label ultimate justice is warranted. In
the moral imperative to execute offenders who kill with premeditation,
one sets in place an absolute ideal that may become difficult to apply to
the murky particulars of everyday life. In state penal systems, ultimate
justice more readily gives way to errors like those discussed above. In
his response to concerns about possibly executing the innocent, Charles
is too quiescent: “If the argument based on the potential for an innocent
execution is to proceed in all honesty, one will be forced to concede that
innocent deaths resulting from released or paroled criminals are far more
frequent (and tragic) than the rare instance of an innocent convict
dying . . . . [W]hy not devise the system so as to place potential and
                                                    35
convicted murderers, not society, at risk?”                But such a proposal


34 See, e.g., CHRISTOPHER D. MARSHALL, BEYOND RETRIBUTION: A NEW TESTAMENT
   VISION FOR JUSTICE, CRIME, AND PUNISHMENT 222 (2001).
35 See Charles, supra note 29, at 13.
266                                     《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


unnecessarily risks executing the innocently condemned as an acceptable
cost of saving other innocents. This scenario could be avoided altogether
by sentencing someone to life in prison without the possibility of parole
instead of capital punishment. This alternative ensures the state leaves
room for wrongful convictions to be discovered and amended without
jeopardizing public safety. In short, ultimate justice becomes an ironic
position when, in the sublime effort to vindicate God’s law or a
transcendent moral order —to render to one what he or she ultimately
deserves—a political community risks committing a life-ending injustice
against an innocent.

      While some may find ultimate justice too extreme to take seriously
as a compelling rationale for capital punishment, it should not be
dismissed out of hand. It offers a robust biblical defense of retribution,
which is but a more sharply stated account than the views of other
distinguished ethicists and theologians who ground their accounts of
retributive justice and justifications for capital punishment in the Noahic
            36
covenant.        Even if others view capital punishment as morally
permissible—rather than required, as Charles argues—their efforts to
vindicate human dignity and their appeals to a classical and morally
authoritative source in Hebrew and Christian scriptures place them on
the same retributive spectrum as Charles, albeit on a less extreme point
than the one he defends.


36 See OWENS, CARLSON & ELSHTAIN, supra note 8; see especially Avery Cardinal
   Dulles, S.J., Catholic Teaching on the Death Penalty: Has It Changed?, in RELIGION
   AND THE DEATH PENALTY: A CALL FOR RECKONING 23, 23-30 (Erik C. Owens et al.,
   eds., 2004); David Novak, Can Capital Punishment Ever Be Justitfied in the Jewish
   Tradition?, in RELIGION AND THE DEATH PENALTY: A CALL FOR RECKONING 31, 31-47
   (Erik C. Owens et al., eds., 2004); and Gilbert Meilaender, The Death Penalty: A
   Protestant Perspective, in RELIGION AND THE DEATH PENALTY: A CALL FOR
   RECKONING 48, 48-56 (Erik C. Owens et al., eds., 2004).
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                                  267


      Moreover, while ultimate justice is discussed here in a religious
frame, there are certainly secular forms of retributivism that are equally
unstinting in demanding capital justice—including other views that are
insufficiently concerned about the potential plight of innocent inmates
on death row. One recalls here the stern words of recent Texas governors
                                        37
defending capital punishment                 even as others decried “The Grisly
Folly of Texas Justice” and allege that the state “may well have executed
                      38
an innocent man.”

      Finally, it is worth noting that ultimate justice has the virtue of
being a thoroughgoing, comprehensive theory of punishment that is
attentive to the different purposes that punishment serves. Charles
locates retribution as his central moral concern but also discusses
deterrence, public safety, and the rehabilitative purposes of punishment.
Though I remain critical of this approach, I contrast it with an anemic or
minimalist view of criminal justice articulated by those who sidestep
these crucial facets of punishment, particularly retribution.

B. Nominal Justice
      The converse of ultimate justice, turning now to the lower limits of
justice, is a position I call nominal justice, so labeled for the idea that it


37 Responding to a question about capital punishment during a presidential debate, Texas
   Governor Rick Perry assured the audience that he never struggled to sleep at night at
   the prospect that an innocent person might have been executed under his watch. The
   crowd applauded loudly at the moderator’s mere mention of the 234 inmates executed
   under Perry’s watch. The audience erupted in cheers as Gov. Perry went on to say “in
   the state of Texas, if you come into our state and you kill one of our children, you kill
   a police officer, you’re involved with another crime and you kill one of our citizens,
   you will face the ultimate justice in the state of Texas, and that is, you will be
   executed.” See Peter Catapano, They Messed with Texas, N. Y. TIMES (Sept. 9, 2011),
   http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/09/09/they-messed-with-texas.
38 See Coates, supra note 22.
268                                  《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


is justice in name only. It lacks substantive moral and religious
grounding, especially for an account of retribution. Indeed, the moral
and religious underpinnings of punishment are most noticeably absent
when crime becomes relegated to a form of cultural sickness and
psychological disease. One religious voice representing this view, T.
Richard Snyder, cites the “punitive spirit” of his own Protestant heritage
and its beliefs about divine punishment, which have unduly influenced
American culture and its justice system. Perhaps the aforementioned
account of ultimate justice is the kind of account Snyder has in his sites.
Nominal justice tends to be suspicious of retributivism, which reduces
the death penalty to a grand form of “payback” or collective revenge.

      To be sure, Snyder rightly worries that punishment can be driven by
cruelty and vengeance. But rather than offering a corrective to
retribution, he offers a different theory of punishment altogether.
Punishment, he maintains, should be restorative, oriented to “the health
and healing of criminals.” Such an approach requires forgiveness—a
crucial concept for Christians—and lots of it. Indeed, forgiveness must
be extended far and wide. In Snyder’s words, “Certainly the one who has
committed a crime is in need of forgiveness . . . . But so too is the
society in need of forgiveness for having created and permitted crime-
                                     39
generative communities to exist.”         In this rendering of the problem,
though, forgiveness and moral accountability for crime are shared and
distributed so widely—between society and the wrongdoer whose
crimes society has helped to create—that accountability and forgiveness
become so diffuse as to be meaningless. One might ask, Are there not
certain crimes of such a grave nature that forgiveness and reconciliation


39 T. RICHARD SNYDER, THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF PUNISHMENT 110-11
   (2001).
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                               269


cannot put them right? Snyder seems undaunted. He concludes by
calling to abolish capital punishment altogether because it “eliminates
the possibility for transformation, forgiveness, or reconciliation” for
families, victims, and the larger community.

      To be fair, there is more to this approach to punishment than can be
explored here. Scholars such as Snyder are rightly concerned to redress
wide-scale social problems such as poverty, crime, and high
incarcerations rates that plague too many communities in the United
States, especially those with significant low-income and minority
populations. Beginning with wide-scale protests in Ferguson, Missouri
in 2014 and spreading to many other cities across the country, the United
State has experienced significant unrest over, and renewed attention to,
the excesses of the criminal justice system, involving police abuse and
brutality, racial prejudice and unequal treatment, and wide-scale distrust
between law enforcement officials and the citizens they are charged to
protect. No one should deny the need for reforms to certain law
enforcement practices and criminal justice systems, some of which
Snyder outlined long ago.

      President Obama, along with public officials and groups of various
political persuasions, called for and worked toward reforms to the
criminal justice system that included rescinding mandatory sentences for
non-violent offenders, addressing overcrowded jails, reducing recidivism,
                                                                            40
and helping former offenders reintegrate into society.                           Some

40 See Barack Obama, Remarks by the President on Criminal Justice Reform, THE
   WHITE HOUSE: PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA (Nov. 2, 2015, 4:15 PM), https://www.
   whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/11/02/remarks-president-criminal-justice-reform.
   This effort has been imperiled in the administration of President Trump whose pledge
   to restore “law and order” has prompted Attorney General Jeff Sessions to roll back
   bipartisan-backed prison reform at the federal level. See Rebecca R. Ruiz, Sessions to
270                                       《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


communities also have experimented with efforts to reshape criminal
justice systems by using innovative restorative justice programs,
especially for nonviolent and youth offenders. Such programs seem
promising and may require other ways of thinking about punishment—
of the kind Snyder commends. All that said, advancing a vision of
restorative justice that supplants rather than supplements retributive
justice fails to provide a sufficiently comprehensive conception of
punishment, which is especially needed to address egregious forms of
violence. Focusing only on healing and therapeutic aims, at the expense
of other vital retributivist goals, leaves us with an incomplete moral
theory of punishment.

C. Charting a Middle Path
      Between these two alternatives, can we find a middle path—a
morally delimited approach to punishment? That is, are there
comprehensive conceptions of punishment that take stock of the multiple
purposes of punishment, retribution especially, that nominal justice
overlooks? Yet, can a via media at same time avoid the excessive
retributive zeal of ultimate justice, which overshadows and jeopardizes a
polity’s broad commitments to justice? A comprehensive account
considers and balances the different rationales that have traditionally
informed western criminal justice systems: retribution, deterrence
                                                              41
(individual as well as general), and rehabilitation.               The more limited


   Toughen Rules on Prosecuting Drug Crimes, N. Y. TIMES (May 9, 2017), https://www.
   nytimes.com/2017/05/09/us/politics/jeff-sessions-sentencing-criminal-justice.html.
41 I focus in this essay on retribution, which is the most contested and least well
   understood reason for punishment, especially compared to the others on which greater
   consensus exists. I describe nominal justice as a minimalist or insufficient approach
   that lacks an adequate appreciation of retribution. I would say, though, that a penal
   theory that neglects the place of, say, rehabilitation also is wanting.
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                                 271


approach to justice that I propose also needs to take seriously, and
correct for, the errors that human institutions commit.

      Just as religious ideas inform the upper and lower limits of
punishment explored here, my corrective account also is theologically
informed. Legal scholar John Witte reminds us that traditional purposes
of punishment underwriting Anglo-American criminal law have clear
antecedents in Protestant thought, including in Protestant notions about
different “uses of the law.” The civil use of law deters crime and
promotes public safety; the theological use of the law “convicts”
offenders of their violations as a necessary precondition for repentance
and rehabilitation; and the educational use of the law teaches and
preserves morality, which serves vital retributive purposes by affirming
                                                                          42
the moral order of the community as enshrined in the law.                      This is an
oversimple description, which I unpack further in the next section. For
now, Witte’s historical retrieval shows the religious roots of modern
                            43
notions of punishment.

      Some might affirm—even as others decry—the religious
underpinnings of secular penal theory and practice. Yet, Witte shows that
these religious antecedents can be located and translated in modern legal
systems through secular analogues that do not rest exclusively or
explicitly upon theological ideas. Witte does, though, conclude his essay

42 The civil and theological uses of the law are central to the thought of magisterial
   reformers Martin Luther and John Calvin. The educative function of the law is more
   unique to Calvin, which may explain why Reformed thinkers who link retribution to
   education are either staunch retributivists (such as Charles) or alternately discomfited
   by the “punitive spirit” they observe in their own religious traditions (as Snyder seems
   to be).
43 Witte’s argument is well worth reading in its entirety. See JOHN WITTE, JR., GOD’S
   JOUST, GOD’S JUSTICE: LAW AND RELIGION IN THE WESTERN TRADITIONS 263-92
   (2006).
272                                      《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


with a critique of contemporary secular approaches to law and
punishment that have abandoned vital ideas once central to religious
accounts of punishment: a theory of objective or natural moral law (as
opposed to the prominent secularist view that morality is relative to time
and place); a moral theory of government based upon transcendent
authority, not simply the popular will; and, perhaps most importantly, a
moral anthropology or view of the human person that is attuned to the
wide arc of human beings’ propensities for good and evil. The human
capacity for both sin and redemption requires balancing retribution and
rehabilitation, respectively, as part of a thoroughgoing moral theory of
punishment. Those who dwell solely on human depravity—as is
prominent in ultimate punishment—overstress retributive approaches to
punishment; those who understate the potential for grave evil (as in
nominal justice) or highlight the inherent goodness of human nature tend
to favor rehabilitative approaches. We need not choose one over the
other, however. Being simultaneously saint and sinner, as Witte suggests,
requires unifying and integrating the different purposes of punishment,
the conceptual achievement of which is made possible through
Protestantism’s different uses of the law. (It is worth noting that
Catholicism and other religious traditions also share some of the same
                                                                              44
purposes and theories of punishment found in Protestant thought. ) This
traditional   approach       provides     a    comprehensive        conception       of
punishment that addresses both the retributive dimension that nominal
justice overlooks as well as the rehabilitative dimensions that ultimate
justice understates. Significantly, in navigating between the upper and



44 For a Roman Catholic defense of overlapping religious and secular purposes of
   punishment, including the implications for capital punishment, see Dulles, supra note
   36.
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                                   273


lower limits of justice, a richer and suppler understanding of retribution
than found in ultimate justice emerges.



VI. Retribution and the Moral Order of Political Life

      Where the retributive focus of ultimate justice often abets or is
abetted by the momentum of vengeful motives, nominal justice couples
the case for rehabilitation with a forgiving or merciful attitude that often
entails leniency or pardon. Justice entails navigating between the moral
limits of vengeance on one hand and forgiveness qua moral leniency, on
           45
the other.      Interestingly, both vengeance and forgiveness, for all their
differences, tend to frame the matter similarly such that justice and
punishment become overly concerned with the individual offender: the
sentence deserved or the path required to secure forgiveness. The
individual victim—whether in factual or fictional crime stories—also
occupies a prominent place in such discussions. The spotlight turns to
those such as Mr. Petit whenever a judge’s verdict is handed down or a
sentence is carried out; they are asked if they experience closure or if
they feel justice has been served. Yet, by focusing intensively on the
individual (whether offender or victim), we can lose sight of the
collective dimensions of justice and retribution. Let me illustrate this


45 Forgiveness is a rich and necessary moral transaction, the power of which should not
   be impugned. The concern I have in mind here entails a kind of sloppy presumption
   that forgiveness and retribution are mutually contradictory: that to forgive entails
   leniency or requires forgoing punishment. To the contrary, an offender who has been
   forgiven by his or her victims may still justly be punished by the state, just as criminal
   punishment can work in parallel with victims who wish to forgive their offenders. The
   film Dead Man Walking (1995) goes even further by offering a depiction of how
   capital punishment can contribute constructively to securing forgiveness.
274                                   《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


concern by turning to another prominent Christian thinker.

      In his famous essay “The Humanitarian Theory of Punishment,” so
titled for the target of his ire, Christian author C.S. Lewis takes aim at a
position that bears similarities to nominal justice. Writing in 1949, Lewis
is deeply concerned about the creeping influences of secularism and
modern psychology on penal theory and the cultural erosion of Christian
moral traditions. According to Lewis, “The Humanitarian theory
removes from Punishment the concept of Desert” by reducing sin and
crime to a psychological and social illness. “But the concept of Desert,”
he goes on, “is the only connecting link between punishment and
            46
justice.”        Lewis contrasts the secular humanitarian approach to a
traditional approach he calls the Christian Retributive theory of
punishment, rooted in the concept of individual responsibility and desert.

      There is much to redeem in Lewis’s moral framework and critique.
I worry, though, that, in his desire to distinguish Christian from secular
principles of punishment, he overextends his focus on retribution and
individual desert as the only measure of justice. For example, in asking
whether punishment deters other crimes or reforms the criminal, he
                                                                             47
notes that “neither of these two last questions is a question of justice.”
But certainly that cannot be true. Lewis misses the mark here on two
related points: first, he denies that deterrence and rehabilitation are
important to Christian theories of justice and punishment; and second, he
misses how these rehabilitative and deterrent features of punishment,
furthermore, are related to traditional understandings of retribution,



46 C.S. Lewis, The Humanitarian Theory of Punishment, in GOD IN THE DOCK: ESSAYS
   ON THEOLOGY AND ETHICS 287, 288 (Walter Hooper ed., 1994).
47 Id.
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                  275


which involve the entire community, not simply the victim and offender.

      On the first point, I noted earlier how Protestant thought, going
back to Luther and Calvin, has long presumed that the civil use of the
law seeks to preserve order and restrain human wickedness—a goal that
modern criminal law translates through idioms of deterrence and public
safety. Certainly, a government’s efforts to deter and prevent the
commission of future crimes and injustices—sins, to use the language of
Christians—is intimately tied to the public’s concern with justice. As
well, other functions of the law such as the theological use of the law to
convict an offender of his sin—so as to induce repentance and
rehabilitation (including through capital sentences that induce an
offender to seek forgiveness) enjoy a long history in traditional Christian
thought.

      Secondly, in addition to conceiving deterrence and rehabilitation as
distinct from Christian conceptions of justice and punishment, Lewis’s
account isolates them from his chief moral concern about individual
desert and retribution. Witte’s account of punishment, though, suggests
how the different “uses” of the law mutually overlap and reinforce one
another, imparting an overarching scope and underlying unity to
Protestant accounts of punishment. Crucial to Witte’s framework is his
concerted effort to preserve the collective (as well as individual)
dimensions present in these different uses of the law and different
purposes of punishment. For example, deterrence, as is well known,
entails both the effort to prevent an individual offender from committing
further crimes as well as collective efforts to discourage others from
carrying out similar offenses (i.e., general deterrence). Similarly,
traditional efforts to teach the individual offender right from wrong are
related to the educative use of the moral law found in Protestant thought,
276                                        《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


yet there is a more public or communal dimension as well. Witte
explains that the educational dimension of “criminal law serves to
restore in the community knowledge of, and respect for, the
                                   48
requirements of moral law.”             It teaches and reinforces among citizens
the basic norms and expectations of public morality, codifying moral
values and enabling the community to coalesce around them. In Henry
Fielding’s words, crime “tears both the moral fiber and the social fiber of
                                                                              49
the community; criminal punishment serves to mend that tear.”
Punishment crucially serves to educate (or reeducate) the public by
vindicating and reaffirming the values transgressed by crime.

      Punishment, then, is not just about individual desert. In classical
Protestant thinking about punishment, there is no sharp separation
between the community and the individual or between the public and the
private; nor are the different purposes of punishment or the different
“uses” of the law neatly segregated. They are all interwoven, together
contributing to a coherent and comprehensive view of justice that can be
broadly construed as the moral order of social and political life. These
different goals and facets of punishment, when collectively conceived
and underwritten by different uses of the law, are what a political
community undertakes (or should undertake) through the institutions of
its justice system.

      This is the backdrop against which I suggest Lewis overstates the
matter when he claims that “take away desert and the whole morality of
                             50
punishment disappears.”           If by this claim Lewis means (as I suspect he



48 See WITTE, supra note 43, at 284.
49 Quoted in id. at 282.
50 See Lewis, supra note 46, at 291.
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                               277


does) that desert is a necessary precondition of punishment, then his
point is undeniably true. We can never punish innocent people by using
them as a means to other ends, whether to slake the thirst for revenge or
deter future crimes or rehabilitate so-called deviants. (It is worth
recalling here that Lewis worried Christians could someday be targeted
as the very deviants that humanitarian theories of punishment wish to
cure or correct.) But in the course of making his argument for the
necessity of desert, he overlooks the insufficiency of desert to a broader
retributive theory of punishment and justice. For there are significant
moral dimensions to punishment and justice—specifically general
retribution—that are as important as giving any individual her due. Let
me gesture to the communal or collective dimensions of retributive
justice and to the role the death penalty might play within such an
account.

                *              *          *               *           *

      Punishment is fundamentally a form of judgment: “an ‘expressive’
act, telling the truth about an offense” as theologian Oliver O’Donovan
describes it. “The core of the retributive idea is the thought that in
punishment something which the offender has put forth comes back.”
The judgment, articulated in the form of a criminal sentence, is “not an
                          51
echo but an answer.”           As O’Donovan affirms, retributive punishment
reflects the community’s judgment and response not to let the crime
stand or be the last word. Retribution involves communication about the
                                                     52
values that a community holds in common.                  Just as there are specific


51 OLIVER O’DONOVAN, THE WAYS OF JUDGMENT 110 (2005).
52 This is not to overlook how a community can communicate its values to the offender
   through other means as well, such as through rehabilitation—a topic to which I return
   at the end. Again, the different purposes of punishment reinforce one another.
278                                       《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


(i.e., individual) and general (i.e., communal or collective) components
of deterrence, there are individual and general (i.e., communal or
collective) dimensions of retributive justice. On one hand, retribution
assigns responsibility to the individual offender for his or her
transgressions against the moral order. When the community “answers”
the offender’s crime, the offender is the most immediate audience. But,
the collective dimension of retribution also involves a polity’s and a
people’s obligations to acknowledge, uphold, and reinforce the
                                                                                       53
community’s moral norms quite apart from what the offender deserves.

      Retribution, as the word suggests, entails efforts to pay tribute to
the community—to its moral order and the values on which its laws are
based. The prefix “re-” actually suggests the paying of an additional
tribute, beyond, say, mere restitution. Restitution, a significant part of
punishment, requires that the offender return to the immediate victim
what has been wrongly taken—restoring what is due or belongs to
another. An offender who has stolen something is expected to return the
stolen item or compensate its lost value. (When what has been taken
cannot be returned—for example, the victim has been injured or
deprived of her livelihood—the offender makes recompense for what the
victim has lost through the crime.) Retribution, however, involves an
added penalty beyond restitution, best conceived as the “tribute” an
offender pays not to the individual victim but to the wider community
whose values the offense has violated.

      A public authority represents the community when it administers


53 I use the terms individual and collective—rather than private and public—because all
   matters involving retributive justice should be carried out on by a public authority on
   behalf of the community. In this way, retribution differs from revenge that is carried
   out by private individuals or mobs.
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                 279


and enforces not only restitution to the victim but the tributary process
for the community as well. In earlier times, an offender paid tribute to a
king or ruler, in the form of a fine, imprisonment, or even corporal or
capital punishment. In modern times, such tributes are paid to a public
authority. For democratic societies, where the government embodies and
represents the citizenry, citizens should apprehend that the additional
tribute is being paid to them as members of the collective. Through its
public authorities and institutions, a community participates in the
retributive process by compelling offenders to pay tribute to the
communal norms and values they violate. Retribution affirms (or re-
affirms in the wake of a breach) those values such as human dignity and
worth that citizens collectively cherish and rely upon to sustain life in
common and to hold their community together. Whereas the individual
dimension of retribution educates or re-educates the offender, there is a
collective or general dimension as well: the education (or reeducation) of
a community. Retribution is the public vindication of the law.
Compelling a tribute is the process by which a citizenry, though its
public authority, understands and expresses the moral order and
reaffirms its guiding values and laws. This rationale explains why
punishment is a public good, which should not be secretive. For when
the community is absent or detached from punitive proceedings, there is
no one present to hear the “answer” of judgment, to recall O’Donovan’s
metaphor, that responds to the offender’s crime. There is no public to
receive the offender’s tribute. Retribution, then, depends upon openness,
transparency, and civic engagement so the public understands what is
being carried out in its name.

      A modern account of general retribution should resist privately
oriented therapeutic ideas of punishment—especially as a defense of
280                                        《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


capital punishment. That is, executions should not be imposed for the
rehabilitative purpose of healing offenders or promoting their repentance.
But nor should capital punishment be implemented for the sake of
bringing “closure” or satisfaction for victims of crimes or their loved
ones. On this reasoning, it would be similarly inappropriate to privilege
the wishes of victims’ families who oppose capital punishment and do
not want execution to be carried out “in their name.” For the “tribute” in
retribution is rendered not to individual victims, but to the community as
a whole, as acknowledgment of its collective values that the offender has
transgressed. Here it is worth noting that some condemned to Death Row,
including those who carried out the Cheshire slayings, report consenting
to their “tribute.”

      The account of general retribution I am proposing here is not
exactly what C.S. Lewis or what most citizens in liberal, individualistic
societies understand by the term retribution. Indeed, it probably seems
strange or sounds insensitive not to privilege victims’ voices such as
William Petit’s given the terrible tragedies and inconsolable pain they
have experienced. But this shift away from the primacy of the victim is
                       54
not unprecedented.          As Harold Berman explains, “In the United States
the retributive theory has often been associated with the avenging of the
victim rather than the avenging of the law—which is quite another
         55
matter.”      What I am calling general retribution or what Berman dubs



54 Oliver O’Donovan lifts up the classical Christian notion in which “the victim’s benefit
   was removed from consideration [of punishment] . . . [A]ny satisfaction a victim
   might take in punishment of the offender could be no more than personal vengeance.”
   See O’DONOVAN, supra note 51, at 115-16. The view is also found in Kant,
   O’Donovan notes.
55 HAROLD J. BERMAN, LAW AND REVOLUTION: THE FORMATION OF WESTERN LEGAL
   TRADITION 183 (1983).
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                                281


“avenging the law” also can be described as vindicating the moral order
of the community and the values on which its laws and practices are
based. This approach expands the communicative dimensions of
                                                                        56
retribution and reinforces the “educative use” of the law.                   Retribution
becomes more than simply communicating to an offender by rendering
what he or she deserves (although it is also always that), or satisfying a
victim’s need for justice (which may attend as a secondary effect), but
more importantly, about reaffirming to the citizenry as a whole the
values that represent their polity and that sustain the civic bonds among
them. Indeed, the primary value of general retribution lies in the power
of symbolism as a form of moral education. Retribution becomes a way
of ordering society in its pursuit of justice and of restoring order to
society following injustice. Through penal institutions and practices,
retribution concretizes as it symbolizes the order of justice that defines a
community.

      Some might see in this account of general retribution an overly
                                             57
ritualistic or even sacrificial quality.          Indeed, punishment often entails
a carefully prescribed civic ritual if its purpose is to achieve the ends


56 “As both the Protestant Reformers and classical jurists understood, the retributive
   function of criminal punishment underscores and reinforces the societal
   condemnation of morally abhorrent behavior, especially when the punishment fits the
   crime, when the serious offenses are met with serious punishments. Conversely, the
   failure to impose suitable penalties for serious violations undermines and corrodes the
   moral belief of citizens by suggesting that their moral beliefs are wrong, that this
   conduct must not be so bad after all. By permitting wrongdoers to profit by their
   wrongs, the failure to punish demoralizes the law-abiding.” See WITTE, supra note 43,
   at 291.
57 For a well-developed purgative defense of capital punishment, see MATTHEW H.
   KRAMER, THE ETHICS OF CAPITAL PUNISHMENT: A PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATION OF
   EVIL AND ITS CONSEQUENCES (2011). Retribution, however, is different from
   purgation, which I find to be problematic and inconsistent with limited pursuits of
   justice and punishment.
282                                       《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


discussed here: compelling the offender to make a tribute that vindicates
the moral order of community. But this is very different from a
sacrificial rite to appease an angry god or to bring sun or rain for the
growing season. General retribution certainly entails using a person for
the good—or better—for the justice of the community. But it is not an
                                                   58
unjust or inappropriate use of a person.                Here recall Lewis’s insight
about the indispensability of individual desert. The offender, after all,
has brought the sentence upon him or herself and deserves the
punishment he or she receives. No one is proposing the sacrifice of
innocents or scapegoats to satisfy some larger divine or communal
purpose. Nor can substituting an innocent for the guilty contribute in the
same way (or in any way) to “the diminution of crime” or the
vindication of justice since executing an innocent is the consummate
injustice.

      But, to the extent that one who is punished deserves to be punished,
a person can rightly be used for retributive purposes so long as he or she
is not misused or exploited (i.e., made a victim of others’ vengeful
motives; subjected to inhumane treatment beyond what is strictly
necessary for the offender to make adequate tribute; designated as
someone who lacks human dignity or whose dignity can be violated).
Indeed, the same value of human dignity and worth that was violated in
the victim is also what instills dignity in the offender and prohibits his
exploitation. This same account of dignity and worth also makes it
possible to “use” the guilty offender for the retributive purpose of



58 Sydney Smith famously proclaimed, “When a man has been proved to have
   committed a crime, it is expedient that the society should make use of that man for the
   diminution of crime; he belongs to them for that purpose.” See WITTE, supra note 43,
   at 281.
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                       283


reaffirming those values. Without the values of dignity and worth, the
moral authority of general retribution collapses. At the same time, this
defense of human dignity becomes the reason to honor moral
prohibitions against cruelty, which stem from these values. To
paraphrase ethicist Paul Ramsey’s moral defense of military force, that
                                              59
which justifies punishment also limits it.         That is, punishment cannot
vindicate human dignity if it violates the very principle that justifies it.

      But does capital punishment transgress the moral limits of
punishment? Does it violate the value of human dignity that it seeks to
vindicate? This returns us to the still unresolved question of retaining or
abolishing the death penalty with which this essay began. Let me close
with some thoughts about how death penalty supporters and opponents
might move forward together within a shared framework.



VII. Limited Justice and Limited Punishment

      What course should be undertaken when a community is divided
over its means of punishment, as the United States and Taiwan seem to
be about the death penalty? I have proposed that one way to advance this
debate is by achieving greater clarity and consensus about the purposes,
goals, and limits of justice and punishment. In examining the limits of
debate through a religious lens, I have considered advocates of ultimate
justice who conceive capital punishment as mandatory—a moral
imperative under certain circumstances. Advocates of nominal justice (as
I’ve called this position) claim the death penalty interferes with the



59 See PAUL RAMSEY, THE JUST WAR: FORCE AND POLITICAL RESPONSIBILITY 143 (1983).
284                                 《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


process of forgiveness and reconciliation, which, they argue, offers a
higher form of justice. As different as these positions are, both view the
value of punishment with respect to the individual, whether the offender
who is punished or forgiven or the victim who is healed and reconciled.

      Punishment at best offers a limited means of restoring justice after a
rupture in the moral order. For many a victim of crime, the status quo
ante can never be fully restored; even the memory of a grave
transgression leaves scars. Recovering the collective dimensions of
retribution as a central purpose of punishment and mode of ordering the
moral life of a community serves, then, as a reminder that the individual
parties (whether victim or offender) are but members of the wider
political collective that defines itself by how it punishes. The
community’s pursuit of justice must always be tempered, its means of
punishment limited as well. To ask that punishment satisfy the desire of
victims, given the inconsolable grief they have suffered, is to ask more
of an institution than it can be reasonably expected to provide. Whether a
victim opposes or supports the death penalty, the community should not
be expected to privilege his or her wishes. It is appropriate and
reasonable, however, for a victim to expect the larger community of
which she is a part to affirm the values the offender has violated at her
grievous expense. Given these values that unite the community, a victim
should be able to expect solidarity from one’s fellow citizens including
those in public authority who, on behalf of the community, pronounce
judgment and exact a tribute from the offender.

      Within such a framework that conceives justice as limited, capital
punishment is neither absolutely prohibited, as nominal justice declares,
nor a theological imperative, as ultimate justice insists. Rather, it remains
a tenable yet still morally delimited form of punishment that, if carried
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                        285


out, serves as a finite means of vindicating the shared values of human
dignity that citizens collectively esteem. One limit and precondition to
using capital punishment as a form of tribute requires redressing the
public’s lack of confidence in the capital justice system. A society that
cannot adequately discriminate between the guilty and the innocent is
not fit to keep capital punishment on the books. Addressing this concern
requires giving excruciatingly close attention to reforms that would
ensure the essential goals of due process such that there is no realistic
chance of executing the innocent. For without such reforms, the death
                                                                              60
penalty can degenerate into a ghastly ritual sacrifice of innocents.
Such reforms are needed to shore up the confidence of the growing
number of Americans who oppose the death penalty for its perceived
unfairness and injustice. In order to remain a measure of limited justice,
then, the death penalty may only be carried out when there is a level of
moral certitude that obviates public doubt over such an awesome
decision—one for which the state, should it err, can never make
adequate amends.

      Elevating the standard of moral certitude may entail reducing
significantly the number of crimes and cases subject to the death penalty.
I argued earlier that practical concerns should be coupled to deep ethical
reasoning. In this case, fewer executions actually could reinforce the
moral principle of general retribution. For when the strongest form of
penalty is reserved for the severest crimes, the tribute a community
exacts in those comparatively fewer circumstances becomes that much
stronger. A society in which “ordinary murder” accrues the same penalty


60 See, e.g., THE CONSTITUTION PROJECT, supra note 23, especially its most recent
   report, IRREVERSIBLE ERROR: RECOMMENDED REFORMS FOR PREVENTING AND
   CORRECTING ERRORS IN THE ADMINISTRATION OF CAPITAL PUNISHMENT.
286                                 《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


as exceptionally heinous murders and terrorist attacks puts all these
crimes on the same par. As the severest penalty, capital punishment
should be used sparingly, reserved to distinguish the community’s
response to the category of crimes that most egregiously violates its
moral order. How else can a community differentiate common murderers
from the Eichmanns, McVeighs, and bin Ladens of the world?

      One might ask whether the Petit murderers belong among the
abominables mentioned above. In the Petit case, where the guilt of the
offenders was not in doubt, capital punishment seems, in my view, a
fitting form of tribute for offenders to render (and for a public authority
to compel) so as to vindicate the community’s commitment to human
dignity that these exceptionally cruel murders violated. So, does that
mean that the State of Connecticut’s decision to end capital punishment
(thereby commuting the Petit murderers’ sentences to life in prison)
undermines the principle of general retribution on which, I’ve argued,
the decision to execute should be made? That is, has the community
effectively failed to enforce a proper tribute to the deeply cherished
values of human dignity that underwrite its laws?

      Not necessarily. Capital justice, whether it is retained or abolished,
must itself be understood as a form of limited justice. Within this
framework, citizens face the prospect that criminals who seemingly
deserve the death penalty—or worse—or who might in other eras have
received it, could still be sentenced to a lesser punishment (e.g., life
imprisonment without parole). This does not in and of itself undermine
the principle of general retribution, provided that the community
compels a tribute that, in its view, adequately vindicates the moral order
that crime has violated (as I think life imprisonment can do). This
rationale is strengthened, however, by preserving a still higher standard
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                          287


for capital offenses—in other words, keeping capital punishment on the
books even if it is rarely, if ever, imposed; for against such a higher
standard, lesser tributes remain appropriate for lesser crimes, however
cruel and heinous they may be (as those committed against the Petit
family surely were).

      Finally, whether the worst offenders die tomorrow on the execution
table or from natural causes decades from now in their jail cells, even
limited justice never gets the last word—at least when conceived within
a religious frame. As the judge and victims in the Petit case made clear,
those who believe that more severe punishments await another time can
take solace that a fuller measure of ultimate justice, not of this world, is
yet to come.

                *            *             *         *            *

      In a memorable passage from his famous essay questioning the
death penalty, “Reflections on the Guillotine,” Albert Camus wonders
how, given human frailty, society can ever be authorized “to pronounce
an absolute judgment . . . [that is] uncertain of ever achieving pure
justice . . . . If justice admits that it is frail,” he continues, “would it not
be better for justice to be modest and to allow its judgments sufficient
                                                         61
latitude so that a mistake can be corrected?”                 Following Camus,
limited justice should be concerned to leave latitude to make amends for
errors in the justice system—a concern that must be balanced with a
commitment to retribution. This tension actually raises a question that
points in a different direction involving another way of conceiving
retribution.


61 Albert Camus, Reflections on the Guillotine, in RESISTANCE, REBELLION, AND DEATH
   173, 216-17 (Justin O’Brien trans., 1960).
288                                  《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


      Though Camus maintained at various points that the death penalty
could be morally justified, he took seriously the principle of “making
amends,” which, like other principles of punishment, entails both public
and private dimensions. The notion of making amends applies to a
society’s criminal justice system and to the offender as well. Picking up
on a theme St. Augustine had articulated centuries earlier, Camus
propounds, “Deciding that a man must have the definitive punishment
imposed on him is tantamount to deciding that man has no chance of
                  62
making amends.”        But why does Camus, an unbeliever, share with St.
Augustine this concern for the offender to make amends? Augustine was
foremost concerned with the state of the offender’s soul and the need to
repent to avoid eternal punishment. Though capital punishment could
have the effect of inducing a personal confession and divine forgiveness,
it is also possible that execution, rather than life in prison, cuts short the
time for one to reconcile with one’s maker in advance of a final meeting.
In any case, this is not a secular rationale for retaining or abolishing
capital punishment that would have swayed Camus. And as I argued
above, when pursued for the purpose of prompting the individual
offender to seek redemption, capital punishment lacks a sufficiently
public justification (especially within societies without established
religions).

      But Camus’s concern for an offender to make amends opens up
another possibility. Society, for its part, might consider whether an
offender who publicly repents and renounces the evil of his crimes
contributes in some measure to reaffirming the moral order he has
violated. Within the retributive framework I have offered, an offender’s



62 Id. at 220.
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                 289


public confession of guilt and lived forms of contrition (within the
confines of prison) could be construed as a form of tribute to the
community and to the order of justice that has been violated. Such
tributes, in their own way, serve to vindicate the community’s most
cherished values; after all, it is the offender, who having challenged and
transgressed these values by his or her crimes, now acknowledges and
helps restore them through a public tribute in the form of accepting guilt
for violating them. Such a public confession or apology might serve a
measure of limited justice that, when coupled with a sentence of life
imprisonment, preserves the communal goals of retribution—of
vindicating the moral order. On this alternate formulation of
retribution—enabling an offender’s public contrition from prison to
serve as a form of tribute—society might decide to forswear capital
punishment, reasoning that, in addition to foreclosing the state’s ability
to make amends should it err, the state hastens or forecloses the
possibility for an offender to make amends and affirm the order of
justice he has violated.

      A public statement of contrition alone does not pay adequate tribute
to the values of human dignity that egregious crimes transgress, but
when combined with life imprisonment, some communities might find it
sufficient. If Eichmann and McVeigh had lived long enough to render
such a tribute on their own volition—to make amends as Augustine and
Camus say—would their public confessions from prison have been more
meaningful tributes than being compelled by the community to pay
tribute with their lives? I myself am not convinced that public
confessional tributes should trump or exclude other tributes enforced by
the community, including capital punishment. Yet, because making
tribute by making amends holds promise for lesser crimes as a way of
290                                   《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


vindicating the moral order of the community, I remain open in principle
to the argument, whatever my doubts.

      Wherever one comes down on particular applications of capital
punishment, it remains an always limited form of punishment that
achieves, at best, a finite measure of justice for a given political
community here on earth. In sketching out the position of limited justice,
I have explored the conceptual parameters, principles, and priorities that
guide religious as well as secular arguments over the morality of capital
punishment. The insights of limited justice show why moral reflection
on punishment should be foremost grounded in the principle of
retribution, yet also chastened by the propensity for human error, and
committed to preserving latitude to make amends. Within the United
States and perhaps other countries such as Taiwan, future death penalty
debates—and debates about the future of the death penalty—would be
well-served if focused accordingly.
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                        291




                                   Reference

Amnesty International. 2016. Death Sentences and Executions 2015.
      London:      Amnesty       International   Publications.   Available    at
      https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/act50/3487/2016/en/.
Berman, Harold J. 1983. Law and Revolution: The Formation of Western
      Legal Tradition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Brugger, E. Christian. 2003. Capital Punishment and Roman Catholic
      Moral Tradition. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
Camus, Albert. 1960. Reflections on the Guillotine. Pp. 173-234 in
      Resistance, Rebellion, and Death, translated by Justin O’Brien.
      New York, NY: Vintage.
Carlson, John D. 2004. Human Nature, Limited Justice, and the Irony of
      Capital Punishment. Pp. 158-194 in Religion and the Death Penalty:
      A Call for Reckoning, edited by Erik C. Owens, John D. Carlson,
      and Eric P. Elshtain. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans.
─. 2014. Defending the Secular from Its Secularist Critics: Albert
     Camus, Saint Augustine, and the New Atheism. Soundings 97:50-
     74.
Charles, J. Daryl. 1993. Outrageous Atrocity or Moral Imperative? The
      Ethics of Capital Punishment. Studies in Christian Ethics 6(2):1-14.
─. 1995. Crime, the Christian, and Capital Justice. Journal of the
     Evangelical Theological Society 38:429-441.
The Constitution Project. 2001. Mandatory Justice: Eighteen Reforms to
      the Death Penalty. Washington, D.C.: Constitution Project. Available
      at http://www.constitutionproject.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/
      MandatoryJustice.pdf.
─. 2014. Irreversible Error: Recommended Reforms for Preventing
292                                《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）



      and Correcting Errors in the Administration of Capital Punishment.
      Washington, D.C.: Constitution Project. Available at http://www.
      constitutionproject.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/Irreversible-
      Error_FINAL.pdf.
Death Penalty Information Center. 2017. Facts about the Death Penalty,
      May 17, https://deathpenaltyinfo.org/documents/FactSheet.pdf.
Dulles, Avery Cardinal, S.J. 2004. Catholic Teaching on the Death
      Penalty: Has It Changed?. Pp. 23-30 in Religion and the Death
      Penalty: A Call for Reckoning, edited by Erik C. Owens, John D.
      Carlson, and Eric P. Elshtain. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans.
Kramer, Matthew H. 2011. The Ethics of Capital Punishment: A
      Philosophical Investigation of Evil and Its Consequences. Oxford:
      Oxford University Press.
Lewis, C.S. 1994. The Humanitarian Theory of Punishment. Pp. 287-
      300 in God in the Dock: Essays on Theology and Ethics, edited by
      Walter Hooper. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans.
Marshall, Christopher D. 2001. Beyond Retribution: A New Testament
      Vision for Justice, Crime, and Punishment. Grand Rapids, MI:
      Eerdmans.
Megivern, James J. 1997. The Death Penalty: An Historical and
      Theological Survey. Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press.
Meilaender, Gilbert. 2004. The Death Penalty: A Protestant Perspective.
      Pp. 48-56 in Religion and the Death Penalty: A Call for Reckoning,
      edited by Erik C. Owens, John D. Carlson, and Eric P. Elshtain.
      Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans.
Murphy, Jeffrie G. 2008. Christian Love and Criminal Punishment. Pp.
      219-235 in Christianity and Law: An Introduction, edited by John
      W. Witte, Jr. and Frank S. Alexander. New York, NY: Cambridge
      University Press.
Retribution and the Limits of Justice                                        293


─. 2006. Legal Moralism and Retribution Revisited. Proceedings
     and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association 80(2):45-
     62.
Murphy, Jeffrie G., and Jean Hampton. 1988. Forgiveness and Mercy.
      Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Novak, David. 2004. Can Capital Punishment Ever Be Justitfied in the
      Jewish Tradition?. Pp. 31-47 in Religion and the Death Penalty: A
      Call for Reckoning, edited by Erik C. Owens, John D. Carlson, and
      Eric P. Elshtain. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans.
Obama, Barack. 2015. Remarks by the President on Criminal Justice
      Reform. The White House: President Barack Obama (Nov. 2, 4:15 PM),
      https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/11/02/remarks-pre
      sident-criminal-justice-reform.
O’Donovan, Oliver. 2005. The Ways of Judgment. Grand Rapids, MI:
      Eerdmans.
Oliphant, Baxter. 2016. Support for Death Penalty Lowest in More than
      Four    Decades.      Pew         Research   Center   (Sept.   29,   2016),
      http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/09/29/support-for-death-
      penalty-lowest-in-more-than-four-decades/.
Owens, Erik C., John D. Carlson, and Eric P. Elshtain, eds. 2004.
      Religion and the Death Penalty: A Call For Reckoning. Grand
      Rapids, MI: Eerdmans.
Pew Research Center. 2010. Few Say Religion Shapes Immigration,
      Environment Views, Sept. 17, http://www.pewforum.org/2010/09/
      17/few-say-religion-shapes-immigration-environment-views/.
─. 2011. Public Opinion on the Death Penalty, Sept. 23, http://
     pewforum.org/Death-Penalty/Public-Opinion-on-the-Death-Penalty.
     aspx.
─. 2012. Continued Majority Support for Death Penalty: More
294                                《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）



      Concern among Opponents about Wrongful Convictions, Jan. 6,
      http://www.people-press.org/files/legacy-pdf/1-6-12%20Death%20
      penalty%20release.pdf.
Ramsey, Paul. 1983. The Just War: Force and Political Responsibility.
      Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Ryan, George H. 2004. Reflections on the Death Penalty and the
      Moratorium. Pp. 221-230 in Religion and the Death Penalty: A Call
      for Reckoning, edited by Erik C. Owens, John D. Carlson, and Eric
      P. Elshtain. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans.
Stassen, Glenn H., and David P. Gushee. 2003. Kingdom Ethics:
      Following Jesus in Contemporary Context. Downers Grove, IL:
      Inter Varsity Press.
Snyder, T. Richard. 2001. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of
      Punishment. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans.
Westmoreland-White, Michael L., and Glenn H. Stassen. 2004. Biblical
      Perspectives on the Death Penalty. Pp. 123-138 in Religion and the
      Death Penalty: A Call for Reckoning, edited by Erik C. Owens,
      John D. Carlson, and Eric P. Elshtain. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans.
Witte, John, Jr. 2006. God’s Joust, God’s Justice: Law and Religion in
      the Western Traditions. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans.
Retribution and the Limits of Justice             295




                        應報與正義的限度
                     — 死刑的宗教與倫理反思

                               John D. Carlson∗


                                        摘要
  美國與臺灣都屬於一個逐漸凋零的，由保留死刑的民主國家所
組成的社群。儘管支持死刑的民意在臺灣仍然堅強，但美國支持死
刑的民意近年來卻逐漸下滑。在美國，宗教上的省思對於塑造公眾
意見論辯的雙方有一定的影響力。因此，針對支持和反對死刑之關
鍵道德論證的宗教基礎加以省察，是很有價值的研究。本文批判特
定的宗教立場，這些立場若非高估了正義而無視其內在的限制，就
是無法有效達成刑罰的中心目的。在兩個極端中間，我提出一條中
間的道路，稱為「有限正義」。此立場一方面認真看待存死論者對
於應報的主張，另一方面也考量到廢死論者對於刑事司法體系之錯
誤的憂慮。有限正義論主張死刑既非在道德上是必須的，亦非被禁
止的。此論建立在一套一般性的應報理論之上，此論的核心視野並
非個人而是社會整體。有限正義論主張一個政治社會可以強制犯罪
者為其犯罪行為付出「代價」。當一個社會這麼做的時候，這個社
會彰顯並且確認其核心的社會價值，比如嚴重犯罪行為所侵犯的人
性尊嚴。我的結論是，在有限的情況下，死刑是彰顯這些公共價值
的重要手段。為建立此論證，本文批判幾種新教觀點與神學思維，
並肯認其他。本文的取徑也可視為宗教思維與倫理省思如何在棘手
的道德議題上活化公共論辯的案例研究。



∗   亞利桑那州立大學歷史、哲學與宗教學院副教授暨宗教與衝突研究中心代主
    任。
296          《中研院法學期刊》第22期（2018年3月）


關鍵詞：死刑、應報、正義、刑罰、宗教與公共生活、新教倫理、
    基督教倫理、法律的用途。
