《2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊》 吳全峰主編
 Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                                 1
臺北 中央研究院法律學研究所 專書（15）
民國 101 年 12 月，頁 1-55




                       Out of Obscurity:
    The Right to Benefit from Advances in Science and
    Technology and Its Implications for Global Health

                            Keynote Address

                       (Delivered on December 18, 2010)

                            Stephen P. Marks＊


                                   Contents
 Introduction                                 C. Consideration of Human
 I. Prologue: Early Concern with                  Rights and Scientific and
     Science and Human Rights                     Technological
     A. Merging of Science and                    Developments in the Early
        Human Rights in the                       Years of the United Nations
        Enlightenment                     II. International Standards Associated
     B. Emergence of Bioethics from           with the Right to Enjoy the
        the Criminalization of the            Benefits of Scientific Progress
        Abuse of Science during               and Its Applications
        World War Two




＊ Docteur d’État, Dipl. IHEIFrançois-Xavier Bagnoud Professor of Health and Human
  Rights Department of Global Health and Population Director, Program on Human
  Rights in Development Harvard School of Public Health. Keynote address delivered
  on December 18, 2010, to the 3rd Conference on Law, Science, and Technology:
  Health, Science, and Human Rights, organized by the Institutum Iurisprudentiae,
  Academia Sinica, in Taipei, Taiwan. The research assistance of Rebecca Wolf is
  gratefully acknowledged.
2                                                2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



         A. The Recognition of the              A. Duty to Respect
            Right to Enjoy the Benefits         B. Duty to Protect
            of Scientific Progress and          C. Duty to Fulfill
            Its Applications in Human       IV. Emerging Issues of the Right to
            Rights Instruments                  Enjoy the Benefit of Scientific
         B. Venice Statement on the             Progress and Its Applications
            Right to Enjoy the Benefits         A. Information and Communica-
            of Scientific Progress and             tions Technology
            Its Applications                    B. Medicine
    III. Normative Content and State            C. Green Technologies, Food
         Obligations to Realize Right to           Security     and     Climate
         Enjoy the Benefits of Scientific          Change
         Progress and Its Applications      V. Conclusion
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                        3




Introduction

     Professor Te-Chung Tang, Professor Chuan-Feng Wu, distinguished
members of the Institutum Iurisprudentiae, honored guests, ladies and
gentlemen.

     The sense of humility I feel in taking the floor at this the 3rd
conference on law, science and technology is only heightened by the
overly generous welcome I have received here, on my first visit to the
island of Taiwan. It is a great honor for me to find myself among such
outstanding scholars but daunting indeed to find myself addressing the
topic of “Health and Science: Human Rights and Legal Issues” in front
of so many much more qualified than I to address this issue.

      My aim is to explore science not as an industry or broad academic
endeavour but rather as a source of innovation of value to human well-
being. I will set this understanding of science in the context of two
interrelated human rights, the first being the very neglected right to
benefit from scientific progress and the second being the right to health.

     This conference comes at a significant moment since, as I will
attempt to demonstrate, telemedicine and e-health, green technology,
access to essential medicines, open software and other urgent issues
involving science and technology are hotly debated without much
reference to the health and human rights, although in an earlier period
they were front and center in the human rights debate, especially in the
early years of the UN. Let me begin, therefore, by recalling some of that
history before proposing elements of the content and applications of the
right to benefit from scientific progress.
4                                              2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



I. Prologue: Early Concern with Science and
   Human Rights

     The juxtaposition of science and human rights appears to be a novel
undertaking of this conference and the organizers deserve enormous
credit for brining into focus the theme of Health, Science, and Human
Rights. However, the concern with benefits for the people from advances
in science is ancient, going back to the Greeks, the Indians, and of
course the Chinese. One need only recall the Four Great Inventions of
ancient China’ (Chinese: 四大發明; Pinyin: Sì dà fā míng), namely, the
compass, gunpowder, papermaking, and printing, which are generally
regarded as among the most influential to the human race through
navigation, warfare, and transmission of knowledge and literature.
English philosopher Francis Bacon even said that these discoveries
“have changed the whole face and state of things throughout the
world … so much that no empire, no sect, no star seems to have exerted
greater power and influence in human affairs than these mechanical
discoveries.”1 Similar references to the history of science recall that
advances in science have become part of the common heritage of human
rights.

     What is novel in what I am addressing is the claim that enjoying
these benefits is a human right of everyone. Is that a pious hope? A
dangerous exaggeration? A meaningless statement? I will attempt to
demonstrate that it is firmly part of formally recognized human rights,
that it has been generally neglected throughout the latter half of the last
century; that it is relevant to some of the most urgent issues of our day,

1   FRANCIS BACON, NOVUM ORGANUM, BOOK I, at CXXIX (1620), available at
    http://www. constitution.org/bacon/nov_org.htm (last visited July 23, 2012).
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                          5




and, finally, that there are some useful ways to make it of practical use to
both the realization of human rights and the application of scientific
advances. Before doing so, let me refer to the ways that the relationship
between science and technology and human rights was considered in the
beginning of the modern era of international protection of human rights.

     This is a story in three chapters. The first is the merging of science
and human rights in the Enlightenment; the second is the emergence of
bioethics from the criminalization of the abuse of science during World
War Two; and the third is the focus on science and technology in the
early years of the United Nations.

A. Merging of science and human rights in the Enlightenment

     In the West, the theories of human rights that emerged in the 16th
and 17th centuries and that took the form of revolutionary movements
based on declarations of rights is inseparable from the scientific
revolution and the concept of natural philosophy, which meant the
scientific study of the physical and natural world. We are astounded
today by the intellectual breadth of Diderot and Voltaire or Franklin and
Jefferson, but their concern with astronomy, mathematics, chemistry,
mechanics, and the diversity of human experience across the globe was
integrated into their arguments for the Rights of Man. Through natural
philosophy and natural rights, science and human rights were born in the
same spirit of empiricism and progress, which characterized the
Enlightenment. The bifurcation of human rights into political and legal
sciences, administration of justice, and theories of the state, on the one
hand, and Natural Philosophy into evolutionary biology, brain research,
neuroscience, behavioral psychology, on the other, is a trend that can be
described as a separation at birth of these twins who developed in
6                                           2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



separate continents, one in the world of hard sciences, sociology,
experimental sciences and the like, with applications in engineering,
medicine and theoretical physics and cosmology, and the other in the
world of moral reasoning, philosophical and political thought and legal
theory and practice, with applications in the laws and institutions of
human governance.

     The Enlightenment was indeed the critical period for science,
medicine, and human rights. Referring to the scientific and democratic
revolutions, the author of The Science of Liberty begins his study of this
convergence by affirming, “These two transformations were linked, and
remain so today: Every scientific nations in the world at the close of the
twentieth century was a liberal, or at least partly liberal, democracy
(meaning a state which guarantees human rights to its citizens, who elect
their leaders.)”2 He argues that these revolutions were not a coincidence,
but science sparked the democratic revolution and “that science
continues to foster political freedom today.”3

     Separately from the possible fostering of political freedom by
scientific advance, the Enlightenment represents for the West both the
affirmation of the scientific method with the related faith of human
progress and the formulation of the human rights which define the
freedom and equality on which the legitimacy of modern governments
have henceforth been judged. Both concepts advanced in the 19th century,
when science applied to industry revolutionized the global economy and
generated immense wealth at the expense of colonized peoples and
oppressed workers. Both phenomena continue today to challenge us to

2 TIMOTHY FERRIS, THE SCIENCE OF LIBERTY, DEMOCRACY, REASON, AND THE LAW OF
  NATURE 1 (2010).
3 Id. at 2.
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                         7




reflect, in the context of globalization, on the human rights implications
of scientific progress. Certainly, in the mid-twentieth century the misuse
of science resulted in some of the most egregious denials of human
rights in human history.

B. Emergence of bioethics from the criminalization of the abuse of
   science during World War Two

     The second phase of this narrative is the lessons of World War II
two centuries later, when the abuse of science was the subject of an
international war crimes tribunal, which launched the Nuremburg Code
and modern bioethics, on a parallel with the rise of global human rights.
In response to the atrocities committed during the Second World War,
the organized international community began in the 1940s to define
norms of behavior relating to both human rights — exemplified in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 1948 — and the specific field
of medical experimentation and responsibilities of health practitioners —
exemplified by the Nuremburg Code, which was included in the trials
and judgment of the Nazi doctors in 1947. The progeny of the
Nuremburg Code includes codes of ethics for doctors and nurses, as well
as detailed principles relating to research and experimentation. Many of
these texts are of a technical nature and are not strictly speaking human
rights texts although some basic norms that are included among
internationally recognized human rights, such as the prohibition of
medical or scientific experimentation without the free consent of the
subjects. Others relate to the responsibilities of health practitioners and
explicitly invoke human rights, such as the declaration on nurses and
human rights and many related texts focus on the role of health
practitioners in executions, torture, and related practices. As a leading
authority on the subject, George J. Annas, put it, the Nuremberg Code
8                                               2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



“was based on what the American judges had heard at trial, including the
arguments of American prosecutors and the American physicians who
served in the roles of consultant (Leo Alexander) and expert witness
(Andrew Ivy) for the prosecution.” 4 In sum, “modern bioethics was
born at the Nuremberg Doctors’ Trial, a health law trial that produced
one of the first major human rights documents: the Nuremberg Code.” 5
Writing a quarter century after the trials a UN expert explained that the
misuse of science by the Axis Powers during WWII was one of the most
glaring examples of the way in which science and technology can be
misused to inflict great suffering.6

     Other Nuremburg trials of major Axis war criminals led to the
adoption of the Nuremberg Principles of accountability for aggression,
war crimes, and crimes against humanity, which constituted one
dimension of what, along with the Charter of the United Nations and the
Universal Declaration, the affirmation of the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all and the foundation for current human rights
and humanitarian law.

     In 1947 UNESCO convened the Committee on the Theoretical
Bases of Human Rights, which sought to clarify the underlying concepts
of the draft Universal Declaration. The Committee considered matters of
science and technology presented by several of the leading thinkers of
the day. J. M. Burgers, Professor at the Technical College of Delft, the
Netherlands, for example, underscored that “the part played by science


4 George J. Annas, The Legacy of the Nuremberg Doctors’ Trial to American Bioethics
  and Human Rights, 10 MINN. J.L. SCI. & TECH. 19, 22 (2009).
5 Id. at 19.
6 George Brand, Human Rights and Scientific and Technological Developments, 4
  HUM. RTS. J. 351, 351 (1971).
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                                9




in modern society makes possible and at the same time puts upon us the
obligation of international co-operation, as well as of looking into the
future in the interest of coming generations.” He articulated a duty of the
community “of setting aside from its funds means for elaborate scientific
research, as a means for alleviating wants of mankind, for the
development of mankind, and for the pursuit of truth” and proposed that
“When scientific work leads to the possibility of technological
applications or of other measures of importance for, or affecting in any
way, the whole of mankind, such applications or measures should come
under the sponsorship of international bodies, deriving their status and
power from international authority.”7

     A. W. Noyes, Professor of Chemistry at the University of Rochester,
NY, for his part, felt that “the first duty of the scientist is to ensure that
the black spots in the world, where poverty and disease are all too
common, are alleviated.” 8 Aldous Huxley bemoaned the fact that
applied science had been in the service of big business first and then of
war departments and foreign offices where it “has begotten the flame
thrower, the rocket, saturation bombing and the gas chamber, and is now
in process of perfecting methods for roasting whole populations by
atomic explosions and for killing the survivors by means of man-made
leukemia and artificially disseminated plague.”9 There is “nothing in the
nature of science or technology,” he continues, “which makes it
inevitable for the scientific worker to be at the service of monopoly,

7 J. M. Burgers, Rights and Duties Concerning Creative Expression in Particular in
  Science, in HUMAN RIGHTS: COMMENTS AND INTERPRETATIONS 215, 216 (UNESCO
  ed., 1948).
8 W. A. Noyes, Science and the Rights of Man, in HUMAN RIGHTS: COMMENTS AND
  INTERPRETATIONS 221, 222 (UNESCO ed., 1948).
9 Aldous Huxley, The Rights of Man and the Facts of the Human Situation, in HUMAN
  RIGHTS: COMMENTS AND INTERPRETATIONS 203, 203 (UNESCO ed., 1948).
10                                               2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



oligarchy and nationalisms” since “professionally speaking, it would be
just as easy for the scientific worker to serve the cause of peace as of war,
of personal liberty, voluntary co-operation and self-government as of
monopolistic statism or capitalism, universal regimentation and
dictatorship.”10

      In its statement on the “Grounds of an International Declaration of
Human Rights” of July 1947, the Committee included a “Right to Share
in Progress” according to which “Every man has the right to full access
the enjoyment of the technical and cultural achievements of
civilization.” 11 The Committee was particularly concerned “to
emphasize the dynamic character of the interrelations of human rights
and the need, therefore, to explore and control the basic ideas which are
in progress of being fitted to new industrial and technological means for
the achievement of human good.”12 This spirit may have contributed to
the inclusion of this right in the Universal Declaration and other
normative text to be discussed later.

C. Consideration of human rights and scientific and technological
     developments in the early years of the United Nations

      The third phase is the early work of the United Nations
Commission on Human Rights focusing its attention on Science and
Human Rights.

      In the halcyon days when the United Nations was attempting to find


10 Id.
11 The Unesco Committee on the theoretical bases of Human Rights, The grounds of an
   international declaration of Human Rights, in HUMAN RIGHTS: COMMENTS AND
   INTERPRETATIONS Appendix II 14 (UNESCO ed., 1948).
12 Id. at 15.
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                        11




its human rights legs and flesh out the agenda of the newly establish
Commission on Human Rights, the memory of the horrendous misuse of
science by the Axis Powers was fresh in the minds of the victorious
powers. George Brand, a witness to those early discussions, described
them as follows: “There is no space in the present expose to recall the
various individuals, including some scientists and non-governmental
groups who have drawn attention to the above-mentioned threats to
human rights posed by recent scientific and technological developments.
In course of time, their concerns reached the agenda and work [programs]
of inter-governmental bodies ... All the while, the feeling has been
developing that an overall study of the impact upon human rights of
recent scientific and technological developments should be undertaken
on an inter-disciplinary basis.”13 With remarkable perceptiveness, Brand
anticipated many of the developments were are witnessing today and
understood thirty years ago their human rights implications, including
those of human genetic manipulation, and more specifically “artificial
inovulation; in vitro fertilization [IVF]; partheno-genesis; choice of sex
of offspring; creation of human beings by an asexual process called
cloning; manipulation of the DNA molecule so as to interfere with the
processes of heredity (‘genetic surgery’); the improvement, by
procedures adopted before birth, of the future intelligence of a child; and
the creation of part-human chimeras.”14 That is not a quotation from
2001 but from 1971! “It is easy,” Brand warned, “but dangerous, to
dismiss all of these possibilities as science fiction.”15

     Following the adoption of the Universal Declaration, which


13 Brand, supra note 6.
14 Id. at 354.
15 Id.
12                                                  2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



explicitly affirmed the right to benefit from scientific progress, the
Commission on Human Rights worked from 1949 to 1966 on the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
(ICESCR), which the U.N. General Assembly adopted the on 15
December 1966. Article 15 specifies that States Parties “recognize the
right of everyone” both “to enjoy the benefits of scientific progress and
its applications”16 and “to benefit from the protection of the moral and
material interests resulting from any scientific, literary or artistic
production of which he is the author.” 17 Soon thereafter, the
International Conference on Human Rights met in Teheran, Iran, from
22 April to 13 May 1968, where, a group of government leaders met to
discuss issues related to human rights and technology and to seek a
common understanding of the way in which scientific and technological
developments affect human rights, which was reflected in Resolution XI
of 12 May 1968. Basing itself on those deliberations, the Conference
adopted the Proclamation of Teheran stating, “[w]hile recent scientific
discoveries and technological advances have opened vast prospects for
economic, social and cultural progress, such developments may
nevertheless endanger the rights and freedoms of individuals and will
require continuing attention.”18

      Following the Teheran Conference, the United Nations General
Assembly adopted Resolution 2450 (XXIII) on 19 December 1968,

16 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights art. 15(1)(b), opened
   for signature Dec. 16, 1966, U.N. Doc. A/6316 993 U.N.T.S. 3 (entered into force Jan.
   3, 1976) [hereinafter ICESCR].
17 ICESCR art. 15(1)(c).
18 PROCLAMATION OF TEHERAN, FINAL ACT OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON
   HUMAN RIGHTS, para. 18, U.N. Doc. A/CONF.32/41, U.N. Sales No. pub. E.68.XIV.2
   (1968). See also U.N. CENTRE FOR HUMAN RIGHTS, UNITED NATIONS ACTION IN THE
   FIELD OF HUMAN RIGHTS, at 302-06, U.N. Doc. ST/HR/2 Rev.3, U.N. Sales No. Pub.
   E.88.XIV.2 (1988).
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                          13




requesting the Secretary-General to create the Advisory Committee on
the Application of Science and Technology to Development. 19 The
General Assembly shared “the concern expressed by the Teheran
Conference that recent scientific discoveries and technological advances,
although they open up vast prospects for economic, social and cultural
progress, may nevertheless endanger the rights and freedoms of
individuals and peoples and consequently call of constant attention.” It
tasked the Secretariat, with the assistance of the Advisory Committee,
with addressing the following issues of concern with regard to human
rights arising out of science and technological advancement: (1)
technological advancement – individual privacy and national sovereignty;
(2) advances in biology, medicine and biochemistry – protection of
physical and intellectual integrity; (3) electronics – limits should be
placed on use of such technology in order to protect the rights of
individuals; (4) generally, nations should be concerned with balancing
scientific and technological progress with human rights and the
advancement of humanity. Accordingly the Commission on Human
Rights transmitted a preliminary report to the General Assembly at its
twenty-fifth session in 197020 (along with a preliminary memorandum
by the World Health Organization dealing with health and human
rights21) announcing that the Secretariat study would “take into account,
as far as possible and in an appropriate manner, the benefits of scientific
and technological developments, so as to be able to assess their
advantages and disadvantages in the light of the intellectual, spiritual,



19 G.A. Res. 2450, ¶ 1, U.N. Doc. A/RES/2450 (Dec. 19, 1968).
20 UNITED NATIONS, HUMAN RIGHTS AND SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENTS
   U.N. Sales No. E.90.III.A.3, (C. G. Weeramantry ed., 1990).
21 U.N. G.A. Doc. A/8055/Add.1 (1970).
14                                           2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



cultural and moral advancement of mankind.”22 The interim report was
issued in February 1970 outlining how the Secretariat proposed to deal
with the issues of the privacy of individuals and the sovereignty of
nations with regard to recordings and other techniques, the “protection of
the human personality and its physical and intellectual integrity in the
light of advances in biology, medicine and biochemistry,” and the “use
of electronics which may affect the rights of the person and the limits
which should be placed or such uses in a democratic society.” 23
Following and update issued in September 1970,24 the final report was
issued at the end of December 1970, coving all the issues assigned,
namely, privacy threatened by use of recording and other technologies;
threats to integrity from advances in biology, medicine and biochemistry;
and the uses of electronics, as well as the hazards arising from atomic
radiation. 25 These efforts focused almost exclusively on threats to
human rights raised by advances in science and technology.

       The Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and
Technology to Development, however, did include the promise of these
advances in its work, culminating in the adoption in 1975 of the
Declaration on the Use of Scientific and Technological Progress in the
Interest of Peace and for the Benefit of Mankind. 26 In this brief
proclamation, the General Assembly raised both the dangers and the
promise of science and technology for human rights. It considered “that,
while scientific and technological developments provide ever increasing


22 U.N. Doc. E.CN.4/1028/Add.4 (Feb. 26, 1970).
23 Id.
24 U.N. Doc. E.CN.4/1028/Add.5 (Sep. 3, 1970).
25 U.N. Doc. E.CN.4/1028/Add.6 (Dec. 29, 1970), and A/8055.
26 G.A. Res. 3384 (XXX), 30 U.N. GAOR, Supp. No. 34, U.N. Doc. A/10034, at 86
     (1975).
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                        15




opportunities to better the conditions of life of peoples and nations, in a
number of instances they can give rise to social problems, as well as
threaten the human rights and fundamental freedoms of the individual,”
and noted “with concern that scientific and technological achievements
can be used to … deprive individuals and peoples of their human rights
and fundamental freedoms,” and “that scientific and technological
achievements can entail dangers for the civil and political rights of the
individual or of the group and for human dignity.”27 It “reaffirmed …
the need to respect human rights and freedoms and the dignity of the
human person in the conditions of scientific and technological progress”
and solemnly proclaimed that “All States shall promote international co-
operation to ensure that the results of scientific and technological
developments are used … for the purpose of the economic and social
development of peoples and the realization of human rights and
freedoms in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations” and
“shall take appropriate measures to prevent the use of scientific and
technological developments, particularly by the State organs, to limit or
interfere with the enjoyment of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of the individual.”28

     Coming closer to the notion of a right to benefit from scientific
progress, the Declaration proclaimed that “All States shall co-operate in
the establishment, strengthening and development of the scientific and
technological capacity of developing countries with a view to
accelerating the realization of the social and economic rights of the
peoples of those countries” and “take measures to extend the benefits of
science and technology to all strata of the population and to protect them,

27 Id. at Preamble.
28 Id. ¶¶ 1, 2.
16                                                2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



both socially and materially, from possible harmful effects of the misuse
of scientific and technological developments, including their misuse to
infringe upon the rights of the individual or of the group, particularly
with regard to respect for privacy and the protection of the human
personality and its physical and intellectual integrity.”29

     However, the work of the United Nations following the 1975
Declaration, focused on such issues of the misuse of psychiatric
treatment of detained dissidents and guidelines on personalized
computer files as they affect the privacy of the individual.30 The Sub-
Commission carried out studies on such issues as unlawful human
experimentation and recent advances in computer and microcomputer
technology.31 UNESCO, of course, was programmatically engaged in
science policy and applications of science and technology to
development but not as a human right. In that period it developed and
adopted in 1974 the Recommendation on the Status of Scientific
Researchers,32 a normative instrument relating to science but which
does not address the right to benefit from scientific progress.

     Two decades later, the World Conference on Human Rights (1993),
convened on the 45th anniversary of the adoption of the UDHR,
reaffirmed the right but once again emphasized the negative dimensions
of threats to human rights from scientific advances rather than the

29 Id. ¶¶ 5, 6.
30 These matters were entrusted in the later 1970s by the Commission on Human Rights
   to the Sub-commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities,
   which commissioned special rapporteurs Erica-Irene Daes and Louis Joinet
   respectively to study them.
31 See, e.g., Commission on Human Rights resolutions 1982/4 of 19 February 1982 and
   1984/29 of 12 March 1984, G.A. Res. 40/112 (Dec. 13, 1985).
32 General Conference, Recommendation on the Status of Scientific Researchers, at 169,
   UNESCO Doc. 18C/Res. (1975).
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                                    17




positive right to share the benefits of progress:

     Everyone has the right to enjoy the benefits of scientific progress
     and its applications. The World Conference on Human Rights notes
     that certain advances, notably in the biomedical and life sciences as
     well as in information technology, may have potentially adverse
     consequences for the integrity, dignity and human rights of the
     individual, and calls for international cooperation to ensure that
     human rights and dignity are fully respected in this area of
     universal concern.33

     The theme of access to science and technology was taken up
indirectly a few years later by UNESCO’s Intergovernmental Bioethics
Committee (IGBC) and the International Bioethics Committee (IBC).34
Three normative instruments have emerged from that effort: the
Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights (1997),
the International Declaration on Human Genetic Data (2003), and the
Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights (2005). The
proposition that human rights should constrain advances in science and


33 Vienna Declaration and Program of Action, ¶ 11, U.N. Doc. A/CONF.157/23 (July 12,
   1993).
34 The IGBC was created in 1998, under Article 11 of the Statutes of the International
   Bioethics Committee (IBC) and consists of 36 Member States. It meets at least once
   every two years to examine the advice and recommendations of the IBC and submit
   proposals for follow-up of the IBC’s work to UNESCO’s Director-General for
   transmission to Member States, the Executive Board and the General Conference.
   However, the World Commission on the Ethics of Scientific Knowledge and
   Technology (COMEST), which is “an advisory body and forum of reflection
   composed of 18 independent experts, … mandated to formulate ethical principles that
   could provide decision-makers with criteria that extend beyond purely economic
   considerations,” has not examined the right to benefit from scientific progress. See
   World Commission on the Ethics of Scientific Knowledge and Technology
   (COMEST), http://www.unesco.org/new/en/social-and-human-sciences/themes/science-
   and-technology/comest/ (last visited Mar. 1, 2012).
18                                                    2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



technology affecting human nature is reflected in UNESCO’s
Declarations of 1997 and 2005. The 1997 Declaration acknowledges in
that “states should seek to encourage measures enabling … developing
countries to benefit from the achievements of scientific and
technological research so that their use in favor of economic and social
progress can be to the benefit of all.”35 The 2005 Declaration is more
explicit when it includes among its purposes “to recognize the
importance of freedom of scientific research and the benefits derived
from scientific and technological developments, while stressing the need
for such research and developments to occur within the framework of
ethical principles set out in this Declaration and to respect human dignity,
human rights and fundamental freedoms; … [and] (f) to promote
equitable access to medical, scientific and technological developments
as well as the greatest possible flow and the rapid sharing of knowledge
concerning those developments and the sharing of benefits, with
particular attention to the needs of developing countries.”36 Even more
explicit is Article 15 on sharing of benefits, in which the General
Conference of UNESCO affirms that “Benefits resulting from any
scientific research and its applications should be shared with society as a
whole and within the international community, in particular with
developing countries” and enumerates seven forms to give effect to this
principle, benefits.37

35 Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights art. 19(a)(iii),
     UNESCO 29 C/Res. 3l (Nov. 11, 1997).
36 Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights arts. 2(d), (f), UNESCO
     SHS/EST/BIO/06/1 (Oct. 19, 2005).
37 The seven non-exhaustive forms are “(a) special and sustainable assistance to, and
     acknowledgement of, the persons and groups that have taken part in the research; (b)
     access to quality health care; (c) provision of new diagnostic and therapeutic
     modalities or products stemming from research; (d) support for health services; (e)
     access to scientific and technological knowledge; (f) capacity-building facilities for
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                                        19




      The United Nations University Press published in 1990 Human
Rights and Scientific and Technological Development, edited by C.G.
Weeramantry,38 followed in 1993 by a sequel including a philosophical
overview and case studies relating to Western Europe, Eastern Europe
(with special reference to Poland), Latin America (Venezuela), South-
East Asia (Thailand), and Africa (Ethiopia).39

      Occasionally treaty bodies have considered state compliance with
the right to benefit from scientific progress. For example, the Committee
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, after examining the initial
report of the People’s Republic of China (including Hong Kong and
Macao) on the implementation of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, urged the government “to remove
restrictions on freedom of information and expression in the State party,
to enable all persons under its jurisdiction to take part in cultural life,
enjoy the benefits of scientific progress and its applications, and benefit
from the protection of the moral and material interests resulting from any
scientific, literary or artistic production of which he or she is the


   research purposes; (g) other forms of benefit consistent with the principles set out in
   this Declaration.” Id. art. 15.
38 UNITED NATIONS, supra note 21, containing chapters on (1) the ways in which both
   specific human rights and general human rights principles are being undermined by
   advances in science and technology; (2) a prospective view of science, technology,
   and human rights; (3) technological self-reliance and cultural freedom; (4) a Western
   perspective on human rights and scientific and technological progress; (5) normative
   response of the international community with regard to impacts of scientific and
   technological progress on human rights; (6) the institutional response; (7) human
   rights and the structure of the scientific enterprise; (8) human rights, technology, and
   development; (9) human rights and environmental issues.
39 U.N. THE IMPACT OF TECHNOLOGY ON HUMAN RIGHTS: GLOBAL CASE-STUDIES, U.N.
   Sales No. E92.III.A.7 (C. G. Weeramantry ed., 1993), containing case studies of
   Venezuela, Thailand, Eastern Europe and Poland, and Ethiopia of the way in which
   science and technology impact human rights issues in these countries.
20                                               2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



author.”40 It made a similar observation concerning Libya, expressing
its concern “about reports that freedom of access to the Internet is
severely restricted in” Libya and calling on the government “to respect
and protect freedom of information and expression …, including on the
Internet, to enable all persons under its jurisdiction to take part in
cultural life and enjoy the benefits of scientific progress and its
applications.”41

      These concerns of the United Nations with certain aspects of
science and technology as they relate primarily in a negative way to
human rights devote almost no attention to the right to benefit from
scientific progress, which could well be the most neglected right of the
international bill of rights. Recently this right has been brought out of
obscurity.



II. International Standards Associated with the Right
    to Enjoy the Benefits of Scientific Progress and Its
    Applications

A. The recognition of the Right to Enjoy the Benefits of Scientific
     Progress and its Applications in human rights instruments

      The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, in Article 27, affirms


40 U.N. Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR), Concluding
   observations of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights People’s
   Republic of China (including Hong Kong and Macao), ¶ 63, E/C.12/1/Add.107 (May
   13, 2005).
41 U.N. Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR), Concluding
   observations of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, ¶¶ 21, 39,
   E/C.12/LYB/CO/2 (Jan. 25, 2006).
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                                        21




that “Everyone has the right freely … to share in scientific advancement
and its benefits,” which Article 15(1)(b) of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) expresses at the right
“To enjoy the benefits of scientific progress and its applications.” In fact,
it was first formulated in the American Declaration of the Rights and
Duties of Man (1948) as the right of every person “to participate in the
benefits that result from intellectual progress, especially scientific
discoveries.” 42 Similar rights are expressed in the Arab Charter of
200443, the Protocol of San Salvador to the American Convention on
Human Rights of 198844, although the African Charter of Human and
Peoples Rights overlooks this right.45 The Charter of fundamental rights
of the European Union of 2000 takes a different approach to scientific
advancement, considering it a threat calling for a reinforcement of
fundamental freedoms.46


42 American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man art. 13, AG/RES. 1591
   (XXVIII-O/98) (Resolution adopted at the third plenary session, held on June 2,
   1998).
43 Arab Charter on Human Rights, League of Arab States, May 22, 2004, 12 Int’l Hum.
   Rts. Rep. 893 (2005) (entered into force March 15, 2008). Article 42 reads, “Every
   person has the right … and to enjoy the benefits of scientific progress and its
   application.”
44 Additional Protocol to The American Convention on Human Rights in the Area of
   Economic, Social and Cultural Rights “Protocol Of San Salvador” (Adopted at San
   Salvador, El Salvador on November 17, 1988, at the eighteenth regular session of the
   General Assembly). Article 14 recognizes “the right of everyone … To enjoy the
   benefits of scientific and technological progress” as well as …the benefits to be
   derived from the encouragement and development of international cooperation and
   relations in the fields of science, arts and culture… .”
45 Unless one considers that elements of this right may be implied from Article 22’s
   reference to the right of all peoples “to their economic, social and cultural
   development … and in the equal enjoyment of the common heritage of mankind” and
   “to ensure the exercise of the right to development” and the right of peoples in Article
   24 “to a general satisfactory environment favorable to their development.”
46 The Preamble to the European Charter of Fundamental Rights it is necessary to
   strengthen the protection of fundamental rights in the light of changes in society,
22                                                 2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



      Little thought seems to have gone into the formulation of this right
and into its interpretation, until UNESCO took it up again in the twenty-
first century.

B. Venice Statement on the Right to Enjoy the Benefits of Scientific
     Progress and its Applications

      Although human rights issues related to science and technologies
continued to be on the international human rights agenda around such
issues as cloning, genetic information, and access to medicines, which
have been taken up by the IBC and by the Commission on Human
Rights (now Human Rights Council), they were not usually expressed in
relation to the right to share the benefits of scientific progress.

      UNESCO did take up the issue in those terms in 2007 when it
convened an expert meeting in Amsterdam, the Netherlands (June 2007),
organized with the Amsterdam Centre for International Law of the
University of Amsterdam, followed the next year by a second meeting in
Galway, Ireland (November 2008), organized and the Irish Centre for
Human Rights, National University of Ireland (NUI). According to
UNESCO the aim of Amsterdam meeting was “to elucidate the content
of a right, which despite its significance on all spheres of human life and
its early normative entrenchment has received over the years very little
attention.”47The third experts’ meeting on the right to enjoy the benefits
of scientific progress and its applications was organized by UNESCO
and the European Inter-University Centre for Human Rights and



   social progress and scientific and technological developments by making those rights
   more visible in a Charter.
47 UNESCO, Report on the Experts’ Meeting on the Right to Enjoy the Benefits of
   Scientific Progress and its Applications, at 3 (June 7-8, 2007).
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                                          23




Democratisation (EIUC) in Venice, Italy, 16-17 July 2009. The Office of
the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), the
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR or the
Committee) also participated in the meeting,48 as did I and a number of
specialists from the scientific and human rights communities. The
Venice Statement noted but did not entirely settle the matter of the
compatibility of the right with the need for incentives in developments in
science and technology and the protection of the rights of the intellectual
property of inventors, which itself is protected by Article 15(1)(c) of
ICESCR.49

     The initiative in Venice has had some reverberations. For example,
the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) took
up the issue and in April 2010, the AAAS Board of Directors adopted a
statement emphasizing the vital connection between Article 15 and the
mission of the organization. The AAAS has been coordinating the
involvement of the U.S. scientific community in the process of defining
and promoting the right. Specifically the Science and Human Rights
Coalition, a network of over 45 scientific membership organizations, has
undertaken the following four initiatives.

     (1) The Welfare of Scientists working group is developing an
awareness raising piece aimed at putting scientific freedom on the
agenda of the UN human rights mechanisms and human rights
organizations more broadly;

48 Id.
49 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, U.N. Doc. A/6316
   (1966), 993 U.N.T.S. 3 (entered into force Jan. 3, 1976) [hereinafter ICESCR].
   ICESCR art. 15(1)(c): “The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize … the
   right of everyone: To benefit from the protection of the moral and material interests
   resulting from any scientific, literary or artistic production of which he is the author.”
24                                             2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



      (2) The Service to the Scientific Community working group is
engaging individual disciplinary societies in the exercise of defining the
right for the purposes of their discipline;

      (3) The Service to the Human Rights Community working group is
developing indicators by which to measure compliance with the right;
and

      (4) The Education and Information Resources working group is
developing      an   online   training   module,     including    multi-media
components, on Article 15.50

      The engagement of scientists in finding ways within their
professional activities, to advance this right is essential to lifting it out of
the obscurity where it now is consigned. The tough question, to which I
will return in the conclusion, is whether the free functioning of the
market with patent protection for inventors, including for corporations
that manufacture and market products that are the result of advances in
science and technology, is a necessary conditions for scientific progress,
even if it means that those who lack resources will not benefit and
therefore the right to share in the benefits of scientific progress does not
really belong to “everyone.” The alternative view, echoing the 1947
Committee on the Theoretical Bases of Human Rights, is that of
scientific advances as a public good. The Venice meeting was divided on
the matter.51 The statement adopted by the meeting acknowledged, “the
right to enjoy the benefits of scientific progress and its applications may
create tensions with the intellectual property regime, which is a


50 Information provided by Jessica Wyndham of the AAAS Science and Human Rights
     Program.
51 UNESCO, supra note 48, at 7.
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                         25




temporary monopoly with a valuable social function that should be
managed in accordance with a common responsibility to prevent the
unacceptable prioritization of profit for some over benefit for all.”52



III. Normative Content and State Obligations to
     Realize Right to Enjoy the Benefits of Scientific
     Progress and Its Applications

      The Venice expert meeting on the Right to Enjoy the Benefits of
Scientific Progress and its Applications elucidated the core content of the
right and defined State obligations and recommendations for
international cooperation. In the final statement the participants
suggested ways to move forward with the interpretation and the
implementation of the right. The normative content followed the
approach of the Committee on Economic Social and Cultural Rights by
defining the normative content and distinguishing duties of states to
respect, to protect, and to fulfill.

      There were four elements of the normative content highlighted by
the experts. The first had to do with creating “an enabling and
participatory environment for the conservation, development and
diffusion of science and technology” through academic and scientific
freedom, equal access and participation, and education. The second is
“Enjoyment of the applications of the benefits of scientific progress,”
which includes technology transfer and capacity-building. The third
element of normative content is “protection from abuse and adverse


52 Id. at 15.
26                                            2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



effects of science and its applications,” such as stem cell research, and
climate change.53

      The obligations of the state regarding this right were expressed as
follows and I will quote in full as this represents the first effort to set out
the specific obligations beyond it very general formulation in the core
instruments quoted.

      A. Duty to Respect

            a) to respect the freedoms indispensable for scientific
     research and creative activity, such as freedom of thought, to
     hold opinions without interference, and to seek, receive, and
     impart information and ideas of all kinds;
            b) to respect the right of scientists to form and join
     professional societies and associations, as well as academic
     autonomy;
            c) to respect the freedom of the scientific community and
     its individual members to collaborate with others both within
     and across the country’s borders, including the freed exchange
     of information, research ideas and results;
            d) to take appropriate measures to prevent the use of
     science and technology in a manner that could limit or interfere
     with the enjoyment of the human rights and fundamental
     freedoms.”

      B. Duty to Protect

            a) to take measures, including legislative measures, to


53 Id. at 16.
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                        27




     prevent and preclude the utilization by third parties of science
     and technologies to the detriment of human rights and
     fundamental freedoms and the dignity of the human person by
     third parties;
          b) to take measures to ensure the protection of the human
     rights of people subject to research activities by entities,
     whether public or private, in particular the right to information
     and free and informed consent.

     C. Duty to Fulfill

          a) to adopt a legal and policy framework and to establish
     institutions to pro- mote the development and diffusion of
     science and technology in a manner consistent with
     fundamental human rights. The relevant policies should be
     periodically reviewed on the basis of a participatory and
     transparent process, with particular attention to the status and
     needs of disadvantaged and marginalized groups;
          b) to promote access to the benefits of science and its
     applications on a non- discriminatory basis including measures
     necessary to address the needs of disadvantaged and
     marginalized groups;
          c) to monitor the potential harmful effects of science and
     technology, to effectively react to the findings and inform the
     public in a transparent way;
          d) to take measures to encourage and strengthen
     international cooperation and assistance in science and
     technology to the benefit of all people and to comply in this
     regard with the States’ obligations under international law;
          e) to provide opportunities for public engagement in
28                                              2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



     decision-making about science and technology and their
     development;
            f) to institute effective science curricula at all levels of the
     educational system, particularly in the State-sponsored schools,
     leading to development of the skills necessary to engage in
     scientific research.54



IV. Emerging Issues of the Right to Enjoy the Benefit
    of Scientific Progress and Its Applications

      The right to enjoy the benefits of scientific progress and its
applications is indeed a neglected right. And yet there are several
burning issues facing the international community with respect to which
it takes on special salience. Let me examine four such areas of scientific
progress the benefits of which are not equally shared, namely,
information      and    communication        technology,    medicine,     green
technologies, and food production.

A. Information and Communications Technology

      Science and technology has made it possible to collect and assess
vast amounts of data, report the news instantaneously from anywhere
through satellite feeds, store the books of the world’s great libraries in
digital form, transfer small and vast sums of money across the world,
conference face-to-face among numerous people located on all
continents, carry out intricate surgical operations remotely and thousands
of other applications that improve live in ways that science fiction barely


54 Id. at 17.
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                              29




imagined a half century ago. The global economy is the 21st century is
characterized in large part by the exponential growth of information and
communication technology. The World Summit on the Information
Society (WSIS) addressed some of the issues but not adequately the
human rights claims.

     We can agree that the World Wide Web is too expensive for
millions of people in developing countries, partly because of the cost of
computers and partly because of government restrictions on free access
to information and of the trends in the global economy to capture and
market information, contrary to the human rights to enjoy cultural
products and to benefit form advances in science and technology.

     As we said to the World Summit on the Information Society, “The
massive disparities in access to information and to the means of
communication—known as “the digital divide”—are a result of the
unequal distribution of wealth among and within countries. The digital
divide is at the same time a cause and a consequence of the unequal
distribution of wealth in the world and within countries Like poverty,
with which it is closely connected, it severely diminishes the capabilities
of people to enjoy their human rights. Information and communication
technologies (ICTs) enable and empower individuals and groups,
particularly those who are exposed, marginalized and vulnerable. Unless
ICTs are made available on a vast scale to those who are at the losing
end of the digital divide, the information and communication society
will remain a force of relative impoverishment of large swaths of the
world’s population and consequently a source of instability and
deprivation.”55


55 The World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS), Statement on Human Rights,
30                                                  2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



       India and China are significant testing grounds for the proposition
that human rights can serve as positive guidelines for placing the
information society in the service of people rather than a source of
economic advantage for those who dominate the world economy. India
offers the technological edge to breaking barriers to Internet access
through the efforts of academics at the Indian Institute of Science and
engineers at the Bangalore-based design company Encore Software, who
have designed innovative devices, the intellectual property rights to
which have been transferred for free to the non-profit Simputer Trust,
which is licensing the technology to manufacturers at a nominal fee.56
China is grappling with the need to expand access to ICT as it seeks to
reduce inequalities produced by its rapid growth, with its habits as a
Communist Party State to control citizens’ access to information. How it
handles this issue will have tremendous repercussions on human rights
in the global economy.

       On October 5, 2009, the International Telecommunication Union
(ITU) hosted a Telecom World Forum in Geneva, at which leaders
discussed issues such as “development; ICTs and climate change; and
cyber security; as well as technology foresight and access; empowering
development through communications; and business models and policy
developments.”57 This forum brought together leaders who represented
governments, international organizations, and the business industry in
order to discuss the way in which information communication


     Human Dignity and the Information Society, ¶ 7 (Nov. 4, 2003).
56 Human Development Report 2001, PC World 2000; Simputer Trust 2000; Kirkman
     2001.
57 International Telecommunication Union (ITU), Importance of ICT in Development,
     Human Rights Highlighted at ITU Telecom World 2009 (Oct. 5, 2009), http://www.
     un-ngls.org/spip.php?page=article_s&id_article=1641.
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                      31




technology (ICT) can bring positive change on a global level.

     UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon and the ITU Secretary General
Touré gave opening remarks. Mr. Ban Ki-moon emphasized that the
United Nations should use ICT to address related to peace, human rights,
developments and climate change. He urged governments and
businesses to develop “more creative ways to use ICTs to usher in a new
green economy” and added, “Let us work together to find new ways to
cut waste, reduce emissions, create jobs, protect against disasters and
promote better standards of living.”58

     Similarly, Mr. Touré emphasized that there is a strong relationship
between ICTs and human rights. He stated that “[c]ommunication is a
basic human right”, and that “if we are to meet the Millennium
Development Goals for ICTs then we will need to work in partnership.
And we will need to innovate. And we will need to develop new
technologies which will help us deliver on our promise to connect the
world.”59

     Probably the most visible advance in technology in the ICT field is
broadband, which is transforming societies through use of the Internet in
developed countries. The failure to realize the right to advances in
technology is reflected in the persistent broadband divide. In 2009,
broadband penetration was 27 per cent in developed countries and only
3.5 per cent in developing countries. As the MDG Gap report noted,
“fixed broadband subscriptions in the developing world are heavily
concentrated in a few countries, with China accounting for half of the
200 million fixed broadband subscriptions, having overtaken the United


58 Id.
59 Id.
32                                            2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



States of America as the largest fixed broadband market in the world in
2008.”60 The worst off is Oceania, South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa,
where penetration rates are less than 1 per cent.

     Similar observations can be made regarding increasing usage of
mobile cellular telephones another issue debated at the forum was new
mobile technologies that can revolutionize ICT in developing countries.
In recent years, the number of subscribers of mobiles phones has
increased tremendously. However, there are still regional disparities in
the use of mobile technologies and internet connections. As pointed out
in the latest MDG GAP Report, “The steady growth of the number of
mobile cellular subscriptions is striking, reaching an estimated 4.6
billion by the end of 2009 and a penetration level of 68 per 100
inhabitants globally. In contrast, fixed telephone lines continued to lose
their share in the market with a penetration of less than 18 per 100
inhabitants globally.”61 The problem of access to the benefits of these
advances in technology is again cost, especially to reach remote areas:
Although prices are continuing decline, the price of fixed broadband
services exceeds monthly gross national income (GNI) per capita in 28
LDCs. The monthly average prices of ICT services by region, in 2009,
was US$28 (in purchasing power parity dollars) in developed countries
and US$190 in developing countries, of which Africa was paying
US$426 or 15 times as much.62

     The more controversial issue regarding any purported right to


60 UNITED NATIONS U.N. MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOAL 8, THE GLOBAL
   PARTNERSHIP FOR DEVELOPMENT AT A CRITICAL JUNCTURE, at 71, U.N. Sales No. E.
   10.1.12 (2010).
61 Id. at 70.
62 Id. at 73.
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                        33




benefit from advances in ICT is whether the broadband spectrum and the
Internet can be part of the “commons,” that is resources that are free for
the use of all. Lawrence Lessig argues that commercial and government
interests should not interfere with the freedom to innovate and create
over the Internet. He is a founder of the Creative Commons, which
issues licenses so that creators can communicate which rights they
reserve, and which rights they waive for the benefit of recipients or other
creators. Such a stance only goes part way to overcoming the obstacles
of a right for all to benefit from ICT.

     Clearly the right to benefit from advances in ICT has a long way to
go. What about medicine?

B. Medicine

     The AIDS pandemic has forced the international community to face
head-on the greatest challenge for the right to benefit from scientific
progress, namely, the protection of intellectual property of patent-holders
when millions face death due to the unavailability of life-saving
medicines. From a legal perspective, we are dealing here with the
confrontation—dare I say a struggle for life and death—between two
human rights: the right “to the protection of the moral and material
interests resulting from any scientific, literary or artistic production”
(Article 15(1)(c) of the ICESCR) and the right “to share in scientific
advancement and its benefits” (Article 15(1)(b)). The former is the
human rights basis for intellectual property protection, according to
which creative ideas and expressions of the human mind that possess
commercial value receive the legal protection of property rights called
“intellectual property rights (IPRs)”. The major legal mechanisms for
protecting IPRs are copyrights, patents, and trademarks. IPRs enable
owners to select who may access and use their property, and to protect it
34                                                2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



from unauthorized use. There is an apparent contradiction between these
two rights when applied to access to medicines: article 15(1)(c) seems to
protect the “right” of pharmaceutical companies to earn a profit from the
drugs they develop, by setting prices that render medicines inaccessible
to the destitute sick, while article 15(1)(b) seems to protect the “right” of
those destitute sick to benefit from the development of new drugs.

       The way out of this dilemma is to distinguish intellectual property
rights from human rights and consider them a temporary monopoly
established for the valid social purpose of encouraging scientific
invention and artistic creation. In other words, an IPR is a legally
protected interest of a lower order than a human right, which implies a
superior moral and legal claim. This distinction should not be interpreted
to imply that IPRs do not have social value for indeed they have a very
high value, justifying limiting article 15 rights reasonably to promote
innovation and creativity.

       Human rights organs have progressively addressed this dilemma,
articulating in different stages the human right to essential medicines.
The Commission on Human Rights adopted a resolution in 2001, in
which it recognized “that access to medication in the context of
pandemics such as HIV/AIDS is one fundamental element for achieving
progressively the full realization of the right of everyone to the
enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental
health.”63 Among a list of measures, it called on States, “to refrain from
taking measures which would deny or limit equal access for all persons
to preventive, curative or palliative pharmaceuticals or medical


63 U.N. Commission on Human Rights, Access to Medication in the Context of
     Pandemics such as HIV/AIDS, ¶ 1, U.N. Doc. E/CN.4/RES/2001/33 (Apr. 20, 2001).
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                                  35




technologies used to treat pandemics such as HIV/AIDS or the most
common opportunistic infections that accompany them”64 and, clearly
with TRIPS in mind, “to ensure that their actions as members of
international organizations take due account of the right of everyone to
the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental
health and that the application of international agreements is supportive
of public health policies which promote broad access to safe, effective
and affordable preventive, curative or palliative pharmaceuticals and
medical technologies.”65 The United States was the only government to
abstain from this resolution, which was adopted on 23 April 2001 by 52
votes with no votes against.

     The Office of the High Commissioner prepared a report in 2001 on
the impact of the TRIPS Agreement on human rights;66 and the Sub-
Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights took this
up in its resolution the same year on “Intellectual Property Rights and
Human Rights.”67 The resolution, adopted by consensus, referred to the
“actual or potential conflict … between the implementation of the
TRIPS Agreement and the realization of economic, social and cultural
rights.”68 In the context of the upcoming Doha Ministerial meeting of
the WTO, the Sub-Commission alluded to the “need to clarify the scope
and meaning of several provisions of the TRIPS Agreement, in particular


64 Id. at ¶ 3(a).
65 Id. at ¶ 4(b).
66 U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights, The Impact of the Agreement on Trade
   Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights on Human Rights, U.N. Doc. E/CN.4/
   Sub.2/2001/13 (June 27, 2001).
67 U.N. Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights,
   Intellectual property and human rights, Res. 2001/21, U.N. Doc. E/ CN.4/SUB.2/
   RES/2001/21 (Aug. 16, 2001).
68 Id. at preamble.
36                                                 2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



of articles 7 and 8 on the objectives and principles underlying the
Agreement in order to ensure that States’ obligations under the
Agreement do not contradict their binding human rights obligations.”69
It reminded “all Governments of the primacy of human rights
obligations under international law over economic policies and
agreements, and request[ed] them, in national, regional and international
economic policy forums, to take international human rights obligations
and principles fully into account in international economic policy
formulation.”70 Significantly, it urged “all Governments to ensure that
the implementation of the TRIPS Agreement does not negatively impact
on the enjoyment of human rights as provided for in international human
rights instruments by which they are bound.”71

       A similar view was expressed by the Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, which “urged WTO members to ensure that
their international human rights obligations are considered as a matter of
priority in their negotiations which will be an important testing ground
for the commitment of States to the full range of their international
obligations.”72 Two years later, on 26 November 2001, the Committee
held a “day of general discussion” on article 15(1)(c), following which it
issued a “Statement on Human Rights and Intellectual Property,” in
which it considered that “intellectual property rights must be balanced
with the right ... to enjoy the benefits of scientific progress and its



69 Id.
70 Id. at ¶ 3.
71 Id. at ¶ 5.
72 U.N. CESCR, Statement of the United Nations Committee on Economic, Social and
     Cultural Rights to the Third Ministerial Ministerial Conference of the World Trade
     Organization (Seattle, 30 November to 3 December 1999), ¶ 8, U.N. Doc.
     E/C.12/1999/9 (Nov. 26, 1999).
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                                   37




applications.”73 It made explicit reference to the development of new
medicines in the context of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS
Agreement and Public Health as an example of the need to strike a
balance between the right to enjoy the benefits of scientific progress and
its applications under article 15(1)(b) and the right to benefit from the
protection of the moral and material interests under article 15(1)(c).74
The Committee concluded by calling for “a mechanism for a human
rights review of intellectual property systems.”75

     The Committee clarified further the human right to essential
medicines in two of its General Comments, an earlier one on the right to
health, and one based on the 2001 Statement. Indeed, in 2000, the
Committee, in its General Comment 14, had interpreted the obligation
under Covenant article 12(2)(d) of the Covenant (“The creation of
conditions which would assure to all medical service and medical
attention in the event of sickness”) to include “the provision of essential
drugs.”76

     But it was in General Comment 17, adopted in 2006, that the
Committee challenged head-on the assumption of the international trade
regime that the rights of companies holding patents over essential drugs
were of the same order as the rights of those who need the drugs, by
treating the former as a temporary, revocable monopoly, and the latter as


73 U.N. CESCR, Human rights and intellectual property: Statement by the Committee
   on Economic Social and Cultural Rights, ¶ 4, U.N. Doc. E/C.12/2001/15 (Dec. 14,
   2001).
74 Id. at ¶ 17.
75 Id. at ¶ 18.
76 U.N. CESCR, The Right to the Highest Attainable Standard of Health (Article 12 of
   the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights), ¶ 17, U.N. Doc.
   E/C.12/2000/4 (Aug. 11, 2000).
38                                                  2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



human rights. Indeed, the Committee affirmed,

            “In contrast with human rights, intellectual property rights are
      generally of a temporary nature, and can be revoked, licensed or
      assigned to someone else. While under most intellectual property
      systems, intellectual property rights, with the exception of moral
      rights, may be allocated, limited in time and scope, traded, amended
      and even forfeited, human rights are timeless expressions of
      fundamental entitlements of the human person….”77

“States parties should,” the Committee continued,

            “ensure that their intellectual property regimes constitute no
      impediment of their ability to comply with their core obligations in
      relation to the right to health ... States thus have a duty to prevent
      that unreasonably high license fees or royalties for access to
      essential medicines … undermine the right ... of large segments of
      the population to health ....”78

      One of the most significant events, legally and politically, for the
right to essential medicines was indeed the Doha Ministerial meeting of
the WTO, which adopted the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement
and Public Health. In an unusually direct statement emanating from the
WTO, better known for highly technical and legally complex sentences,
the meeting declared: “The TRIPS agreement does not and should not
prevent Members from taking measures to protect public health … in


77 U.N. CESCR, The Right of Everyone to Benefit from the Protection of the Moral and
   Material Interests Resulting from Any Scientific, Literary or Artistic Production of
   Which He or She Is the Author (article 15, paragraph 1(c), of the Covenant), ¶ 2, U.N.
   Doc. E/C.12/GC/17 (Jan. 12, 2006).
78 Id. at ¶ 35.
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                                  39




particular to promote access to medicines for all.”79 To be perfectly clear,
the declaration added, “In this connection, we reaffirm the right of WTO
members to use, to the full, the provisions in the TRIPS Agreement,
which provide flexibility for this purpose,” meaning parallel importing
and compulsory licensing. The text acknowledges that “[e]ach member
has the right to grant compulsory licences and the freedom to determine
the grounds upon which such licences are granted…[and] the right to
determine what constitutes a national emergency or other circumstances
of extreme urgency, it being understood that public health crises,
including those relating to HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and other
epidemics, can represent a national emergency or other circumstances of
extreme urgency.”80

     The problem is that these flexibilities are almost never applied.
They are nevertheless a significant step to put the right to share in the
benefits of scientific progress into practice. It should be noted that
TRIPS agreement itself states that “the protection and enforcement of
intellectual property rights should contribute to the promotion of
technological innovation into the transfer and dissemination of
technology, to the mutual advantage of producers and users of
technological knowledge and in a manner conducive to social and
economic welfare, and to a balance of rights and obligations.”81 At the
intergovernmental level, the Global Strategy and Plan of Action on
Public Health, Innovation and Intellectual Property defined as one of the

79 World Trade Organization, Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public
   Health, Ministerial Declaration of 14 November 2001, ¶ 4, WT/MIN(01)/DEC/2
   (Nov. 14, 2001).
80 Id. at ¶ 5.
81 Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, Annex 1C
   Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) art. 7,
   Apr. 15, 1994. 1867 U.N.T.S. 3 (entered into force Jan. 1, 1995).
40                                                   2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



elements of the strategy to “improve, promote and accelerate transfer of
technology between developed and developing countries as well as
among developing countries.”82 In fact, Element 4 of the Plan of Acton
is devoted to transfer of technology.83 However, the related government
commitments use the language of “promote,” “encourage,” “facilitate,”
and “examine the feasibility of….” For example, among that actions to
be taken are to “explore and, if feasible, develop possible new
mechanisms to promote transfer of and access to key health-related
technologies of relevance to public health needs of developing
countries.”84

       As part of his mandate as UN Special Rapporteur on the right of
everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical
and mental health, Paul Hunt, presented the Guidelines to the General
Assembly in 2008, explaining that “the central objective of the
Guidelines is to provide practical, constructive and specific guidance to
pharmaceutical companies and other interested parties, including those
who wish to monitor companies and hold them to account.”85 These
forty-seven Guidelines deal with general policy; the disadvantaged;
transparency; management, monitoring and accountability; corruption;
public policy influence, advocacy and lobbying; quality; clinical trials;
neglected diseases; patents and licensing; pricing, discounting and
donations; ethical promotion and marketing; public-private partnerships;


82 WHO Sixty-First World Health Assembly, Global Strategy and Plan of Action on
     Public Health, ¶ 14, A61/VR/8 (May 24, 2008).
83 Id. at ¶¶ 33–34.
84 Id. at ¶ 34.
85 U.N. Secretary-General, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Right of Everyone to
     the Enjoyment of the Highest Attainable Standard of Physical and Mental Health, ¶
     46, U.N. Doc. A/63/263 (Aug. 11, 2008) (Quotations from the Guidelines are from
     the version in the annex to that document).
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                            41




and associations of pharmaceutical companies. They call upon
companies to recognize the importance of human rights in their
corporate    mission     and    provide      board-level   responsibility   and
accountability for its access to medicines strategy, with a public
commitment to contribute to research and development for neglected
diseases, and respect the right of countries to use TRIPS flexibilities.
The Guidelines then address questions of management, including “an
effective, transparent, accessible and independent monitoring and
accountability mechanism,” both internal and external, as well as
participation from a human rights perspective. Other Guidelines would
have companies comply with various international standards on
corruption, good manufacturing practice, human subject research, and
other areas. Special provision relate to promoting research and
development on neglected diseases. Regarding patents and licensing, the
Guidelines call on drug companies to “respect the right of countries to
use, to the full, the provisions …TRIPS…, which allow flexibility for
the purpose of promoting access to medicines, including the provisions
relating to compulsory licensing and parallel imports” and “respect the
letter and spirit of the Doha Declaration….”

     The Human Rights Council recognized “that access to medicine is
one of the fundamental elements in achieving progressively the full
realization of the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest
attainable standard of physical and mental health.”86

     A final example of scientific progress in the medical field is that of
gene therapy. Although a National Institutes of Health (NIH) study has
stated, “With one notable exception [a French study in which a


86 Human Rights Council, Resolution 12/24.
42                                                2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



therapeutic transgene was introduced into the bone marrow cells of
children], no therapeutic effects have been achieved in gene therapy
trials to date,” somatic gene therapy has been studied intensively, with a
few successful outcomes.87

       The potential danger of this type of genetic engineering—and even
the inheritability of transgenes—is highly speculative, though “it is not
outside the expertise of existing IVF clinics.”88 A partner in a biotech
investment firm has said, “I suspect there are more groups than we know
who are actually working on therapeutic cloning.”89

       Those who would ban human experimentation in cloning and
germline gene therapy—applying a restrictive approach—fear that such
technology threatens human existence as we know it because the
genome of future generations will undergo unpredictable mutations and
thus alter human nature itself. The more permissive approach favors
improving human well-being by eliminating life-threatening diseases
and enhancing the quality of life and the capacities of human beings. The
tension between hope for and fear of advances in biotechnology and
genetics      has   profound     philosophical,      political,    and    economic
ramifications. This tension is fueled by divergent and partial responses
offered by international trade and intellectual property law, human rights
law, and specific instruments on biomedicine.90 The interpretation of the

87 WORLD HEATH ORGANIZATION, ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON HEALTH RESEARCH,
     GENOMICS AND WORLD HEALTH 63-65 (2002).
88 NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH, STEM CELLS: SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS AND FUTURE
     RESEARCH DIRECTIONS 33 (2001).
89 Raja Mishra, Clone Research Quietly Builds in World’s Labs, Boston Globe, June 21,
     2002, at A1.
90 The principal biomedicine instruments are the Council of Europe, Convention for the
     Protection of Human Rights and Dignity of the Human Being with Regard to the
     Application of Biology and Medicine: Convention on Human Rights and
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                                       43




human rights implications of cloning and germline therapy is colored by
those assumptions, with the consequence that reference to existing
instruments of human rights law results at best in ambiguous
applications of these standards and more commonly in radically
contradictory interpretations. I have proposed a framework for assessing
the human rights implications of this technology elsewhere.91

      From the perspective of the right to enjoy the benefits of scientific
progress, the issue of altering the human genome generates positions that
are the opposite of those relating to ICT or medicine. In the latter areas,
the politically progressive approach and the policy option that is the
most egalitarian would ensure that people unable to pay market prices
have the related goods and services such a Position is based on their
right to enjoy the benefits of scientific progress. The progressive position
on genetic alteration and the argument most protective of the human
person would oppose favoring or even allowing the development of this
technology and thereby would not support anyone sharing in the benefits
of these advances. The ambiguity of this position is quite explicit in the
UNESCO Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights. In the
same sentence it recognizes “that research on the human genome and the
resulting applications open up vast prospects for progress in improving
the health of individuals and of humankind as a whole,” and


   Biomedicine art. 21, Apr. 4, 1997, E.T.S. No. 164 (entered into force in Dec. 1, 1999);
   the Council of Europe, Additional Protocol to the Convention for the Protection of
   Human Rights and the Dignity of the Human Being with Regard to the Application of
   Biology and Medicine, Jan. 12, 1998, E.T.S. No. 164 (entered into force Mar. 1,
   2001); and the Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights
   (UDHGHR), reprinted in Records of the General Conference, UNESCO, 29th Sess.,
   29 C/Res. 19, at 1 (1997).
91 Stephen P. Marks, Tying Prometheus Down: The International Law of Human Genetic
   Manipulation, 3 CHI. J. INT’L L. 115, 121-36 (2002).
44                                           2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



immediately emphasizes “that such research should fully respect human
dignity, freedom and human rights, as well as the prohibition of all forms
of discrimination based on genetic characteristics.”92 Special precautions
are set out for any research on the human genome. For example,
“Research which does not have an expected direct health benefit may
only be undertaken by way of exception, with the utmost restraint,
exposing the person only to a minimal risk and minimal burden and if
the research is intended to contribute to the health benefit of other
persons in the same age category or with the same genetic condition,
subject to the conditions prescribed by law, and provided such research
is compatible with the protection of the individual's human rights.”93
The principle of the right to share in benefits of scientific progress creeps
back when the Declaration affirms, “Benefits from advances in biology,
genetics and medicine, concerning the human genome, shall be made
available to all, with due regard for the dignity and human rights of each
individual.” 94 However, the Declaration draws the line at cloning:
“Practices which are contrary to human dignity, such as reproductive
cloning of human beings, shall not be permitted.”95 The UNESCO text,
like the European Protocol to the Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and the Dignity of the Human Being with Regard to the
Application of Biology and Medicine, assume that reproductive cloning
is not an advance in science but an affront to human dignity. A survey on
attitudes on this issue in Taiwan found that professionals in healthcare or
law as well as younger professionals as an age group demonstrated less
opposition to human cloning than religious professionals were more

92 UNESCO, Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights, preamble (Nov.
     11, 1997).
93 Id. art. 5(e).
94 Id. art. 12(a).
95 Id. art. 11.
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                               45




strongly opposed to human cloning.96 Attitudes will remain divided
everywhere on whether such advances in science should be shared. The
consensus is must easier to reach on sharing green technology.

C. Green technologies, food security and climate change

     Enormous advances are beginning in response to the negative
effects of runaway technology and industrial production, in particular the
use of fossil fuels and other non-renewable sources of energy and the
emission of polluting agents that have spread disease and threatened the
protective ozone layer and especially that have contributed to the process
of the warming of the planet. The consequence from rising sea levels,
flooding of interior rivers and landslides from heavy rain, with deaths
and injuries, water contamination, infectious diseases, and indirect
effects from loss of shelter, displacement, disruption of livelihoods and
networks of social support. Each of these consequences represents clear
deprivations of the human rights to life, adequate standard of living,
water and sanitation, health, adequate food and adequate housing.

     The dilemma here is evident: non-industrialized countries
justifiably want to benefit from the advance in technology that have
generated the wealth of the rich countries but sharing in this technology
means more pollution and global warming. Part of the answer has been
to shift the sharing of advances in technology to making green
technologies available to poor countries. That is easier said than done.

     Although no reference is made to the right to benefit from scientific
progress, it is clear that any action to mitigate or adapt to climate change

96 Che-Ming Yang, Chun-Chih Chung, Meei-Shiow Lu, Chiou-Fen Lin, Ethical Attitudes
   on Human Cloning among Professionals in Taiwan and the Policy Implications for
   Regulation, 21 ISSUES L. MED. 35, 35-44 (2005).
46                                              2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



effectively requires a sharing of the relevant technologies with the
countries lacking the capacity to apply them without coordinated
international action. Indeed the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC)97 requires all parties to “promote and
cooperate in the development, application and diffusion, including
transfer, of technologies, practices and processes that control, reduce or
prevent anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases.”98 The transfer of
technologies is central to the UNFCCC. Wealthier countries recognize
that they contributed more to the climate change problem than
developing countries and have greater capacity to deal with it. Under the
UNFCCC they agreed to make technologies available to developing
countries to assist both in managing the impacts of climate change and in
transiting to low-carbon economies. However, technology transfer had
not advance until the Bali Conference of the Parties in 2007. One
program under the auspices of the UNFCCC that addresses directly the
need for the transfer of green technology is the Clean Development
Mechanism by which developed countries can meet their reduction
commitments by investing in greenhouse gas emission reduction and
sustainable development projects in developing countries. The Clean
Development Mechanism has two goals: to provide developed countries
with some flexibility in how they meet their emissions reduction
commitments, and to assist developing countries to achieve sustainable
economic development.

     As pointed out by the United Nations Development Programme, the



97 U.N. Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), opened for signature
   May 9, 1992, U.N. Doc. A/AC.237/18 (Part II)/Add.1 (entered into force Mar. 21,
   1994).
98 Id. art. 4(1)(c).
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                       47




Clean Development Mechanism is the only greenhouse gas emissions
reduction mechanism that involves developing countries. Since these
countries are likely to be the most severely affected by the impacts of
climate change, the mechanism is intended to provide flows of
technology and capital to help them achieve a more sustainable
development that is less intensive in greenhouse gas emissions.

      The 15th Conference of the Parties to the Framework Convention
on Climate Change, meeting in Copenhagen in 2009, failed to produce
tangible results for either adaptation or mitigation. However, and 16th
COP, meeting in Cancún, Mexico, which just ended on 11 December in
2010,99 reached agreement on some important issues, which imply some
advance in sharing in scientific progress to reduce global warming
emissions (mitigation) and prepare countries to lessen the impacts of
climate change (adaptation). Many rejoiced in the fact that China and the
US accepted The “Cancun Agreement” locking in emissions reductions
targets for 80% of global emissions, establishmenting of the Green
Climate Fund, to serve as a mechanism to deliver support for urgent
climate actions such as protecting forests, and shifting to greener energy
technologies. The fund will also deliver resources to the newly
established technology centers, which will over research, scientific
exchange and technical support for countries looking to improve
efficiency and reduce emissions from sectors like energy production,
transportation, and buildings. Most of the attention of the COP was on
financing and less on sharing in scientific progress. The matter of a
binding climate treaty was deferred until the 17th COP, which took place
in Durban, South Africa in 2011. There the FCCC states parties agreed to

99   U.N. Climate Change Conference Cancun, COP 16/ CMP 6, November 29–
     December 10, 2010.
48                                                2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



adopt a universal legal agreement on climate change as soon as possible,
and no later than 2015, as well as to establish a second commitment
period under the Kyoto Protocol, and to launch the Green Climate
Fund. 100 The various mechanisms established under the FCCC
contribute to the sharing of scientific progress, but without explicit
reference to the human right to such sharing.

     The International Council on Human Rights policy has noted that
“more than most topics in the climate change arena, actions and
decisions on technology will have significant human rights implications”
and goes on to note, “For developed and developing countries alike – but
especially for the latter where, in many cases, basic human rights still
remain unfulfilled and development is therefore pressing – development
in the future will increasingly rely on access to efficient, clean and
renewable technologies. Indeed, it will require restructuring of entire
economies. The imperative to establish security for human rights over
the long-term in conditions of climate change will require the
dissemination (and transfer) of technologies for energy generation and
distribution, for transport, housing, water generation and so forth.”101

     The ICHRP proposes “a human rights optic,” which “can help
ensure equitable access to new technologies in recipient countries
through sensitivity to the possibility of inequalities of access and
participation that mutually reinforce privilege and vulnerability.” Its
study also notes, “Although social and economic rights are clearly

100 Report of the Conference of the Parties on its seventeenth Session, held in Durban
    from 28 November to 11 December 2011, U.N. Doc. FCCC/CP/2011/9, http://unfccc.
    int/resource/docs/2011/cop17/eng/09.pdf.
101 INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL ON HUMAN RIGHTS POLICY, CLIMATE CHANGE: TECHNOLOGY
    POLICY AND HUMAN RIGHTS (2011), http://www.ichrp.org/en/projects/138 (last
    visited Apr. 2, 2012).
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                                   49




relevant to economic development in ‘developing countries,’ the
language of rights has only been partially integrated in development
discourse.”102 After examining the obligations of the ICESCR, the study
concludes “However, while the ICESCR … encourages wealthier states
to provide assistance to other states to fulfil social and economic rights,
there is no binding obligation upon them to do so.”103 It does not discuss,
however, the ICESCR obligation to ensure that every one enjoys the
benefits of scientific progress, under article 15(1)(b).

     At the regional level an interesting OAS case is worth recalling. In
December 2005, a petition on behalf of Inuit native people from Canada
and the United States was filed with the Inter-American Commission of
Human Rights, alleging human rights violations due in large part to the
failure of the United States to curb its greenhouse gas emissions. Among
the rights alleged to be violated is rights “to enjoy the benefits of their
culture.”104 It is interesting that this right is normally read with the
righty to enjoy the benefits of scientific progress but the petitioners in
this case focused more on the harm to culture than on their right to
benefit, in this case, from non-greenhouse gas emitting technology. The
IACHR dismissed the petition in November 2006 on the basis that the
petition failed to establish “whether the alleged facts would tend to
characterize a violation of rights protected by the American



102 INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL ON HUMAN RIGHTS POLICY, CLIMATE CHANGE AND HUMAN
    RIGHTS: A ROUGH GUIDE 14 (2008).
103 Id.
104 Petition to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights Seeking Relief from
    Violations Resulting from Global Warming Caused by Acts and Omissions of the
    United States, Submitted by Sheila Watt-Cloutier, with the Support of the Inuit
    Circumpolar Conference, on Behalf of All Inuit of the Arctic Regions of the United
    States and Canada (Dec. 7, 2005).
50                                                  2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



Declaration.”105 The Petition has nonetheless been praised as one of the
first climate change cases linking global warming with the violation of
human rights.

      The IACHR separately deliberated on the issue in 2011 urged
“States to keep human rights at the forefront of climate change
negotiations, including in designing and implementing measures of
mitigation and adaptation.” 106

      A special mention should be made about China. China has been one
of the strongest voices against industrialized countries calling on
developing countries to bear the burden of mitigation in ways that will
slow their development, even if CO2 emissions result from such
development. At the same time, China has shown leadership in
developing green technologies. For example on April 2008, the Ministry
of Science and Technology (MOST), along with five other government
agencies and four UN agencies, hosted a high-level International Forum
on Climate Change Science & Technology Innovation in Beijing. The
world leaders and experts in the area of green technology discussed the
challenge of climate change and the opportunities for innovative
solutions for two days with more than 600 participants from 30 countries
and over 10 international organizations. By its own description “The
forum was aimed to leverage global knowledge and expertise in the fight
against climate change by exploring the role of new technologies for
increasing energy efficiency, alternative and renewable energy and


105 Letter from the IACHR to the petitioner (Nov. 16, 2006), available at http://
    graphics8.nytimes.com/packages/pdf/science/16commissionletter.pdf (last visited July
    24, 2012).
106 The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR), Press release, IACHR
    Concludes its 141st Regular Session No. 28/11, Apr. 28, 2011, http://www.oas.org/
    en/iachr/media_center/PReleases/2011/028.asp (last visited July 24, 2012).
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                                   51




adapting to climate change.”107

     As the UNDP Resident Coordinator notes, “The role of China will
be critical. China has shown great leadership in applying innovation to
development challenges. Given the size and scale of the opportunity for
green technology applications in China, there is tremendous room to
cooperate in areas such as carbon capture and sequestration, low-carbon
material production, and design of eco-cities. Such successes will benefit
both China and the world.”108 Among the announced outcomes was a
new UN Climate Change Partnership Framework to be launched by
China involving nine UN agencies and over a dozen national partners to
establish a common framework for policy and action.

     At the global level, the United Nations Human Rights Council has
considered the matter for several years. In its resolution on “human
rights and climate change,” adopted by consensus on 25 March 2009, it
affirmed “that human rights obligations and commitments have the
potential to inform and strengthen international and national policy-
making in the area of climate change, promoting policy coherence,
legitimacy and sustainable outcomes.”109 The panel discussion, which
took place in June 2009 in response to resolution 10/4, did not raise
explicitly the right to share in scientific progress although, in introducing
the panel the Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Deputy High Commissioner for
Human Rights, noted, “The human rights perspective underlined the


107 UNDP China, Green technology—innovative solutions for climate change High-
    level Forum held to discuss future actions to combat climate change through
    technology innovation (Apr. 25, 2008), available at http://www.undp.org.cn/modules.
    php?op=modload&name=News&file=article&catid=14&topic=6&sid=4291&mode
    =thread&order=0&thold=0.
108 Id.
109 U.N. HRC. Res. 10/4, preamble (Mar. 25, 2009).
52                                               2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



need for international assistance and cooperation to address the unequal
burden falling on those who are least able to carry its weight. This
perspective also brought into focus how the adverse effects of climate
change were not only felt by countries and economies, but also - and
more fundamentally - by individuals and communities.”110 The burden
is on individuals and communities, who in fact are the beneficiaries of
the right in article 15(1)(b), the implementation of which requires the
assistance to which Ms. Kyung-wha refers. One of those obligations and
commitments is the sharing of scientific progress, which so far has not
been part of the deliberations.



V. Conclusion

      The right to share the benefits of science and technological
advances sounded like a reasonable proposition to the great minds
assembled in 1947 to reflect on what should go into the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. Basically, little has changed since Aldous
Huxley and the other members of the UNESCO panel warned of the
obstacles business and governments placed in the path of making
scientific advances available to those who need to share in their benefits.
Nevertheless, their voice was heard and this right has found its way in to
the principal aspirational and legally binding human rights instruments
adopted at the global and regional levels. However, it has been left there
to languish as what is perhaps the most neglected right in the corpus of
internationally recognized human rights.

110 Human Rights Council Panel Discussion on the Relationship between Climate
     Change and Human Rights, Summary of Discussions 1 (June 15, 2009), available at
     http://www2.ohchr.org/english/issues/climatechange/consultation.htm.
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                        53




     Reasons why it is neglected are not hard to find. If you scratch
beneath the surface, it turns out that the proposition of sharing in these
benefits as a human right of all is a rather revolutionary proposition,
challenging the financial interests of major countries and corporations
for whom access to these benefits should be submitted either to market
forces or to the discretionary authority of states to provide concessionary
support to technologically deprive countries at whatever level and
whenever they wish. The concept of a human right suggests that the
benefits should be available as soon as feasible in accordance with
available resources and in preference to other legally protected interest,
such as ownership in intellectual property.

     Does this mean that inventions should not be protected by patents?
The free functioning of the market with patent protection for inventors,
including for corporations that manufacture and market products that are
the result of advances in science and technology, is a necessary condition
for scientific progress, even if it means that those who lack resources
will not benefit and therefore the right to share in the benefits of
scientific progress does not really belong to “everyone.” For this reason,
politicians have tended to avoid the human rights perspective when
dealing with transfer of technology. However, just like the right to health
requires that rules protecting patents give way to the urgent needs of
developing countries to respond to health emergencies, transfer of
technology more broadly must be based on the right of people
everywhere to benefit from scientific progress.

     The experience with access to essential medicines has taught us that
the pendulum can shift direction if and when social mobilization
overrides business as usual and the HIV/AIDS crisis provided that
momentum. The shift has been limited in the drugs field and TRIPS
54                                           2011 科技發展與法律規範雙年刊



flexibilities are available in theory but rarely used in practice. Similarly,
the current crisis on climate change has mobilized resources for
mitigation and adaptation, including significant commitments to transfer
of technology. However, it is treated as enlightened self-interest or
charity on the part of developed countries, or both, but not as a mater of
a human right of the most vulnerable to climate change to benefit from
green technologies in their own economies and from the duty of those
who caused the problem in the first place to apply technology to clean it
up. When hundreds of billions of dollars are at stake, governments are
not going to acknowledge a formal and legally binding obligations. They
will, however, engage in programs that effectively bring the benefits of
scientific progress to those who lack the capacity to invent and apply
scientific and technical knowledge to the problems they face.

     Innovation in science and medicine depends on the creation of
incentives to invest and to reap benefits from such investment. A
distinction is needed between these legitimate interests and the equally
legitimate moral claim that science and technology are part of the
common heritage of humankind. The gains from commercial activity
based on innovation in developed countries has proved to be more than
adequate to allow the means to be put in place to give meaning to right
to share the benefits of science and technological advances.

     If the right to benefit from scientific progress is to be lifted out of
obscurity it needs to fit the policy objectives of the major players. In the
scientific community, the dissemination of results of research and
education in science and technology are highly desirable. The problem is
that the pressures on scientists to publish in peer reviewed publications,
to obtain funding for research, and to be on panels of the most
prestigious organizations, does not provide many inducements to involve
Keynote Address: Out of Obscurity                                        55




people in developing countries. Nor are there many incentives to bridge
the gap between Finland, at the top, and the LDCs at the bottom of
performance in science testing or even enrollment in science classes.

     Therefore, the principle of a human right to benefit from scientific
progress is easy to accept; allocating the resources and directing
programs toward massive science education and transfer of technology
have failed miserably to alter the current disparities. Until and unless
these obstacles are overcome, the words of the Universal Declaration
that “[e] veryone has the right freely … to share in scientific advancement
and its benefits” will remain hollow.
