《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯
主題演說：司法改革十週年的回顧與展望  廖福特主編                                                         1
 臺北 中央研究院法律學研究所 專書（18）
民國 103 年 7 月，頁 1-47




Legislating Responses to Security Threats:
          The Requirement of Legislative Authority to
                Take Anti-Terrorist Measures

                            Keynote Address

                        (Delivered on December 9, 2011)

                               Barak Medina＊

                                    Contents
 Introduction
 I. Legislating Anti-terrorist Measures: An International Comparison
      1. Targeted Killings and Other “Military” Measures
      2. Detentions and Criminal Trials
      3. Interrogations and Information Gathering
      4. Summary
 II. Positive Evaluation of the Decision whether to Legislate: Legal and
      Political Considerations
      1. The Requirement of Explicit Legislative Authorization
      2. The Decision whether to Legislate: Political Considerations
 III. The Appropriate Role of the Legislature
      1. The Benefits of Requiring Legislated Authorization
      2. Symbolic Costs of Legitimizing Human Rights Infringements in
          Legislation
 IV. Concluding Remarks


＊ Lawrence D. Biele Professor of Law and Dean, Faculty of Law, Hebrew University of
  Jerusalem, Israel.
  ［責任校對：楊承燁、王文咨］              。
  穩定網址：http://publication.iias.sinica.edu.tw/51601141.pdf。
2                                              《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯



       Introduction

      In Hamdan (2006), in which the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that a
suspected terrorist cannot be tried by a military commission, Justice
Breyer pointed-out that the Court’s holding “rests upon a single ground:
Congress has not issued the Executive a ‘blank check.’ ” According to
this position, “[w]here …no emergency prevents consultation with
Congress”, the Court would “insist” requiring “the President [to return]
to Congress to seek the authority he believes necessary.”1 This doctrine
is of high importance in every democracy, but its scope is quite vague.
For one thing, it is debated whether the proposition “Congress has not
issued the Executive a ‘blank check’” is merely an interpretation of
some specific legislation or rather a constitutional rule, resembling the
Non-Delegation doctrine. Moreover, it is not settled whether this
requirement of legislative authority applies to all anti-terrorist measures.
For instance, does it apply to targeted killings or restrictions like curfew
or closure imposed on the population at an occupied territory, which are
typically not authorized in legislation? An additional aspect is the status
of the laws of war (mainly the Geneva Conventions) in this respect: does
the conclusion that international law does not prohibit taking a certain
measure exempt the Executive Branch from the requirement to seek
explicit legislative authority? Finally, as a matter of policy, what are the
expected consequences of insisting on legislative authorization—would
it limit (for better or for worse) the arsenal of actions the government can
take in its fight against terrorism?

      The first step in the attempt to answer at least some of these

1 Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 548 U.S. 557, 636 (2006) (joined by Justices Kennedy, Souter,
    and Ginsburg).
Keynote Address: Legislating Responses to Security Threats                3


questions is to understand the current practices in the democratic world
regarding legislating responses to security threats. The comparative
analysis presents a mixed picture. Under the prevailing constitutional
norms, the requirement of legislative authorization is limited mainly to
instances of measures taken in the territory against citizens, and to
activities aimed at retribution rather than preemption. Accordingly, while
the last decade has witnessed a growing involvement of legislatures in
delineating what measures can legitimately be employed and in what
circumstances, this legislation is limited mostly to authorizing measures
employed within the territory and target citizens, and only scarcely one
can find legislation authorizing “military” anti-terrorist activities taken
abroad. Moreover, while such legislation does impose some restrictions
on the use of force, reflecting an interest in achieving appropriate
“balancing” between security and liberty, its more dominant purpose is
precisely in the opposite direction, aiming at legitimizing the use of
certain measures that were otherwise considered prohibited.

     Not surprisingly, legislators are reluctant to initiate legislation
which restricts or otherwise delineates the powers of the Executive
Branch in its fight against terrorism. The stakes are high, and imposing
restraints on the use of certain types of military force is typically
perceived as a politically unrewarding activity, especially when the
measures are directed against foreigners. Thus, if legislating what
measures can be employed is desirable, it is probably inevitable to
expand the relevant constitutional doctrine and in appropriate cases to
judicially enforce the requirement of explicit legislative authorization to
take certain measures. The debate is whether such requirement is indeed
desirable. I suggest that legislatures should play a greater role in
delineating the powers governments may employ in their fight against
terrorism.
4                                                 《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯



     The requirement of legislative authorization is based on several
arguments. A well known one is that of democratic self-government. The
requirement of explicit legislative authorization to take certain measures
is essential to induce democratic deliberation.2 It may seem that the
quite poor record of legislation in the democratic world, which primarily
enables, rather than restricts governmental activities, should serve as a
strong indication that insisting on legislated authorization is futile. Even
worse, the enactment may be detrimental to the protection of basic
liberties, due to the symbolic and other indirect adverse effects of
authorizing in legislation human rights infringements. I find these
concerns unfounded. The duty to openly justify holding certain powers,
while approaching the tragic choices involved in responding to security
threats under a Rawlsian constraint of “public reason,”3 substantially
restrains the powers the Executive is authorize to take. The concern of
the symbolic adverse effects of authorizing human rights infringements
is limited. Once it is accepted that basic liberties may justifiably be
infringed under certain circumstances, there is no escape from
delineating those circumstances.

     According to an opposite concern, if enforcing the requirement
does prevent the government from applying certain measures, it will
endanger the national security. This concern too is unpersuasive. The


2 As suggested by Justice Scalia in Hamdi, “[i]f civil rights are to be curtailed during
  wartime, it must be done openly and democratically, as the Constitution requires…”.
  Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, 542 U.S. 507, 578 (2004). In his concurring opinion in Hamdan,
  Justice Breyer referred to this reasoning: “judicial insistence upon … consultation
  [with Congress] does not weaken our Nation’s ability to deal with danger. To the
  contrary, that insistence strengthens the Nation’s ability to determine—through
  democratic means—how best to do so. The Constitution places its faith in those
  democratic means.” Hamdan, 548 U.S. at 636.
3 JOHN RAWLS, POLITICAL LIBERALISM 223 (1993).
Keynote Address: Legislating Responses to Security Threats                         5


doctrine under consideration does not require the government to obtain
the legislature’s approval to employ certain measures (or, for that
purpose, to declare “war” or a state of emergency). It merely imposes the
Executive Branch to convince the legislature that certain measures
should be included in the arsenal of actions that can be used, in a given
set of circumstances, in the fight against terrorism. Indeed, when the
circumstances are exigent, the Executive Branch may employ its
emergency powers and take actions even without legislative authority. It
may also take immediate measures as needed in cases of necessity. The
government is required, however, to establish that the circumstances are
indeed exigent. The fight against terrorism should not be regarded as
constituting a state of emergency, as the measures that governments
consider as essential to purse this fight are well known. It is the
Executive Branch’s responsibility to initiate legislative proceedings to
obtain the authority it deems necessary.

     Legislation provides the required authority only when it explicitly
addresses specific measures and details the circumstances in which each
of them can be employed. Thus, decisions such as the U.S. Congress
Authorization for the Use of Military Force (AUMF), which authorizes
the President “to use all necessary and appropriate force” against those
involved in the 9/11 terror attack, “in order to prevent any future acts of
international terrorism against the United States,” are insufficient. Such
an authorization may fulfill the requirement of the War Powers
Resolution, by providing “[a]uthority to introduce United States Armed
Forces into hostilities.”4 But this is an authority to use, in a specific

4 The AUMF provision that “Congress declares that this section is intended to
   constitute specific statutory authorization…” refers to the War Powers Resolution
   requirement of a “provision [which] specifically …states that it is intended to
   constitute specific statutory authorization” to use force (section 8(a)(1)).
6                                           《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯



context, only those measures that the President finds as “necessary and
appropriate” which the Executive Branch is empowered to take
according to existing legislation. Resolutions such as the AUMF do not
trump the requirement of legislative authorization to take specific anti-
terrorist measures.

     The essay proceeds as follows: Part I provides an overview of the
scope of legislation in several Western democracies in determining the
legitimacy of specific responses to security threats. Part II discusses
legal and political considerations that affect the decision whether to
legislate in this context. Part III presents the case in favor of a greater
involvement of the legislature in determining what measures are
legitimate in response to threats of terror, by evaluating the benefits and
the costs of legislation in this area.



I. Legislating Anti-terrorist Measures:
   An International Comparison

     Countries vary in the intensity of their fight against terrorism, and it
is thus difficult to compare the various legal systems’ tendency to
legislate in this area. A state that does not use measures such as targeted
killings or administrative detentions of suspected terrorists can hardly be
expected to authorize in legislation employing such powers. With this
caveat in mind, this Part aims at providing a brief overview of the
current practice in this area in several democratic states. Democracies
take numerous anti-terrorist measures, and instead of detailing all the
nuances of specific statues in each country, the discussion here presents
only the main patterns. It addresses the following anti-terrorist measures:
Keynote Address: Legislating Responses to Security Threats                          7



targeted killings and other “military” measures, administrative detention,
and information gathering.5

     The comparative study addresses two main aspects: First, in this
Part, to what extent the power to employ specific anti-terrorist measures
is explicitly authorized in (domestic) legislation; and when such
legislation is missing, what is the alternative legal basis of taking such
measures? Second, in Part II below, when such legislation exists, what
are the prevailing reasons for the enactment?

1. Targeted Killings and Other “Military” Measures

     Several countries, including the United States and Israel, have made
targeted killing—the deliberate assassination, usually by an airstrike, of
a person who is involved in terrorist activities, as a preemptive
measure—a central part of their fight against terrorism. As a general
matter, democracies do not authorize in legislation taking such actions.
The prevailing view is that as long as this policy is applied as a
preemptive measure, rather than for pecuniary purposes or deterrence, an
explicit legislative authorization is not required. In some countries, such
as the U.S., the policy of targeted killings is authorized in Presidential
Executive Orders; 6 while in others even such an explicit statement


5 For a related typology, see Daphne Barak-Erez, Terrorism Law between the
  Executive and Legislative Models, 57 AM. J. COMP. L. 877 (2009) (evaluating the
  choice between promulgating anti-terrorism measures through the executive (“the
  executive model of terrorism law”) as opposed to doing so through the legislative
  branch (“the legislative model of terrorism law.”)); John Ferejohn & Pasquale
  Pasquino, The Law of the Exception: A Typology of Emergency Powers, 2 INT’L J.
  CONST. L. 210, 216-18 (2004) (referring to “the legislative model” as one which
  “handles emergencies by enacting ordinary statutes that delegate special and
  temporary powers to the executive.”).
6 Executive Order 12333 (1981) bans covert acts of murder for political reasons, but
  in 1998 President Clinton issued a presidential finding (equivalent to an executive
8                                                  《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯



endorsing this policy is missing. This approach enables legislatures to
refrain from taking part in resolving the difficult dilemmas about the
conditions in which it is justified to use such measures.

     In the absence of explicit legislation, the arguable legal authority to
employ this policy is typically based on international law. The main
source is the customary international law and Article 51 of the United
Nations Charter, which allows countries to use force in self-defense after
suffering an “armed attack.”7 The prevailing view is that if there is no
explicit domestic law that prohibits the state from applying this measure,
no explicit authorization is needed. Courts and scholars find two types of
general norms as sufficient domestic authorization. One type is
legislation which grants the Executive Branch with general authority to
use force. This is the case in the U.S., in which the government and
some scholars refer in this respect to the broad language of the AUMF,
which authorizes the President “to use all necessary and appropriate
force against those nations, organizations, or persons he determines
planned, authorized, committed, or aided the terrorist attacks that
occurred on September 11, 2001, or harbored such organizations or
persons, in order to prevent any future acts of international terrorism
against the United States by such nations, organizations or persons.”8


  order) authorizing the use of lethal force in self-defense against Al-Qaeda in
  Afghanistan. Following the attacks of September 11, 2001, President Bush reportedly
  made another finding that broadened the class of potential targets, authorizing to kill
  even U.S. citizens abroad if there was strong evidence that they are involved in
  organizing or carrying out acts of terrorism against the United States. See, e.g.,
  Gabriella Blum & Philip Heymann, Law and Policy of Targeted Killing, 1 HARV.
  NAT’L SEC. J. 145, 149-51 (2010); NILS MELZER, TARGETED KILLING IN
  INTERNATIONAL LAW 37-44 (2008).
7 Abraham D. Sofaer, Terrorism, the Law, and the National Defense, 126 MIL. L. REV.
  89, 119 (1989).
8 FINDLAW, Authorization for Use of Military Force (Enrolled Bill), available at
Keynote Address: Legislating Responses to Security Threats                              9



Similarly, the Israeli Supreme ruled that the requirement of domestic
authorization to deliberately kill persons who take “direct part in
hostilities” is fulfilled by the general authority granted in legislation to
the armed forces, “to do all acts necessary and legal, in order to defend
the State and in order to attain its security-national goals.”9

      Another type of legislation which is often mentioned as a possible
formal source of authority is domestic legislation which provides law
enforcement officers with the power to use, in appropriate circumstances,
all the necessary means to effect the arrest.10 A related argument is that
the authorization can be found in the general concept of necessity; or, as
in the Israeli case, by reference to the criminal law defense of lawful
capacity of office.11 The Israeli Supreme Court ruled, in response to the
claim about the lack of legislated authorization, that “when soldiers of
the Israel Defense Forces act pursuant to the laws of armed conflict, they


   http://news.findlaw.com/hdocs/docs/terrorism/sjres23.enr.html (last visited May 15,
   2012).
 9 Article 1 of Basic-Law: the Army; article 18 of the Administration of Rule and
   Justice Ordinance, 1948; article 40(b) of Basic-Law: the Government, which
   recognizes the government’s powers to take “any military acts needed in order to
   defend the State and public security.”; HCJ 769/02 Public Committee Against
   Torture in Israel v. Government of Israel, 62 (1) PD 507, para. 19 [2006] (Isr.),
   English translation available at http://elyon1.court.gov.il/files_eng/02/690/007/A34/
   02007690.a34.pdf.; The Israeli Court ruled there that the state may deliberately kill
   persons on the basis of article 51(3) of the First additional Protocol to the Geneva
   Convention, which provides that “civilians shall enjoy the protection afforded by this
   section, unless and for such time as they take a direct part in hostilities.”
10 For a discussion of the legitimate scope of such legislation, see, e.g., Tennessee v.
   Garner, 471 U.S. 1 (1985) (holding that such statutes are constitutional insofar as
   they authorize the use of deadly force against only if the use of such force is
   necessary to prevent a person’s escape from arrest and the officer has probable cause
   to believe that the suspect poses a significant threat of death or serious physical
   injury to the officer or others).
11 According to article 34(m)(1) of the Israeli Penal Code, a person shall not be
   criminally liable for an act which he “has a duty, or is authorized, by law, to do”.
10                                                《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯



are acting ‘by law,’ and they have a good justification defense.”12 The
prevailing view in the U.K. is that targeted killings are authorized by
Section 3(1) of the Criminal Law Act, 1967, which states that “a person
may use such force as is reasonable in the circumstances in the
prevention of crime…,” and by the common law norms of self-defense.13
Similarly, in Germany a reference is made to legislation which
empowers law enforcement officers to kill a person in order to protect
others from serious bodily harm or unlawful violence to their lives.14

       However, it is doubtful whether the last type of legislation is indeed
sufficient here. First, a criminal law defense, of either excuse or
justification, is not tantamount to explicit, ex-ante authorization to use
force. When a criminal law justification applies, the underlying
assumption is that a criminal prohibition was violated, but that in the
relevant circumstances there was a justified reason for doing that. In
contrast, a statute which authorizes a state official to employ a policy of
targeted killings presents the view that this policy is a justified one.15
The aim of the requirement of statutory authorization is to call the
legislature to determine whether the action is justified, not whether state-


12 HCJ 769/02 Public Committee Against Torture in Israel v. Government of Israel, 62 (1)
     PD 507, para. 19 [2006] (Isr.).
13 MELZER, supra note 6, at 22-27.
14 Id. at 12-13. For such “final rescue shot” acts, see, e.g., Section 54(2) PolGBW
   (Baden-Württemberg); Art. 66(2)(2) BayPAG (Bayern); § 66(2)(2) BbgPolG
   (Brandenburg); § 60(2)2) HSOG (Hessen); § 76(2)(2) Nds.SOG (Niedersachsen); §
   63(2)(2) POG RP (Rheinland-Pfalz); § 57(1)(2) SPolG (Saarland); § 34(2)
   SächsPolG (Sachsen); § 65(2)(2) SOGLSA (Sachsen-Anhalt); § 64(2)(2) ThürPAG
   (Thüringen).
15 For a discussion on this issue, see Miriam Gur-Arye, Can the War against Terror
   Justify the Use of Force in Interrogations? Reflections in Light of the Israeli
   Experience, in TORTURE: A COLLECTION 183 (Sanford Levinson ed., 2004); Miriam
   Gur-Arye, Justifying the Distinction between Justification and Power (Justifications
   vs. Power), 5 CRIM. L. & PHIL. 293 (2011).
Keynote Address: Legislating Responses to Security Threats                           11



actors should be exempted from criminal liability if taking such measure.
Second, criminal law defenses and the legislation which provides law
enforcement officers with the power to use force to effect an arrest refer
to instances in which the use of lethal force is not a premeditated plan to
kill someone. The typical case is that of a failed attempt of arrest of a
person imposing an immediate threat. In contrast, targeted killing is a
policy in which armed forces deliberately aim to kill a person, often
without attempting to capture him (presumably based on the view that
such an attempt is impractical). It is a policy that according to the
prevailing view can be employed even when the targeted person does
not impose an immediate threat, as it is sufficient that he takes a direct
part in hostilities. This distinction was at the heart of the European Court
of Human Rights decision in the case of McCann, which evaluated the
killing of three persons, suspected as IRA terrorists, by the U.K.
government. The U.K. denied a premeditated plan to kill these persons,
possibly due to its recognition of a lack of sufficient legislative
authorization to carry out such a policy, and the Court thus employed the
norms relevant to the use force to effect an arrest, and found the action
unlawful.16

     Interestingly, international human rights treaties too mostly exclude
the requirement of explicit authorization in law as one of the conditions
of justified infringement of the right to life. The International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), the American Convention on

16 The Court ruled that due to the failure of the authorities to make sufficient
   allowances for the possibility that their intelligence assessments might be erroneous
   and to the automatic recourse to lethal force when the soldiers opened fire, the
   killing did not constituted the use of force which was no more than absolutely
   necessary in defense of persons from unlawful violence, within the meaning of
   article 2(2)(a) of the European Convention. McCann and Others v. the United
   Kingdom, 21 Eur. Ct. H.R. 97, para. 148-50 (1995).
12                                                 《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯



Human Rights, and the African Charter of Human and People’s Rights
prohibit arbitrary deprivation of life.17 Similarly, Article 2(2) of the
European Convention on Human Rights, allows for killing a person
“when it is… absolutely necessary, in defence of any person from
unlawful violence; in order to effect a lawful arrest or to prevent escape
of a person lawfully detained; [or] in action lawfully taken for the
purpose of quelling a riot or insurrection.” Here too the standard
prerequisite for justified infringement of other right, that the action
would be “as proscribed by law,” is missing. Possibly, the implicit
assumption is that legitimate infringements of the right to life are those
that are not premeditated, that is that can be justified in terms of
immediate necessity, and these do not require an explicit ex-ante
authorization; whereas deliberate killings can be justified only under the
laws of war, outside the scope of human rights law.

       Explicit legislated authorization is also missing regarding the
various military anti-terrorist measures taken by governments within
occupied territories. The international law of Belligerent Occupation
authorizes the occupying state to “take all the measures in [its] power to
restore, and ensure, as far as possible, public order and safety, while
respecting, unless absolutely prevented, the laws in force in the country”
(Article 43 of the Annex to the Hague IV Regulations Respecting the
Laws and Customs of War on Land, 1907). These norms provide the
occupying state with extensive powers, making legislation, under the
conventional view, unnecessary. Thus, for instance, the Israeli Supreme


17 See International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, art. 6(1), Dec. 16, 1966, 99
     U.N.T.S. 171 (entered into force Mar. 23, 1976); American Convention on Human
     Rights, art. 4, Nov. 22, 1969, 1144 U.N.T.S. 123 (entered into force July 18, 1978);
     African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, art. 4, June 27, 1981, 1520 U.N.T.S.
     217 (1982).
Keynote Address: Legislating Responses to Security Threats                            13



court ruled that the government is authorized, notwithstanding the lack
of authorizing domestic legislation, to take within occupied territories
anti-terrorist measures such as demolitions of houses in which suicide-
bombers lived, and to employ mass curtailments of freedom of
movement, including imposing curfews and closures on the residents in
certain areas, and the construction of a separation barrier within the
occupied territory.

2. Detentions and Criminal Trials

      The central measure taken against suspected terrorists is
apprehension. Democracies use three different means is this respect:
indicting suspects through the “regular” criminal justice system,
sentencing them in military commissions, and holding such persons in
military (or “administrative”) detention. The first option is always based
on explicit legislation, as it is essential in determining offences.

      An important element here is the quite broadly-defined crime of
“membership” in a terror organization, and providing it material support.
Such legislation can be found in practically all democracies. Examples
include, in the U.S., 18 U.S.C. § 2339B, a statute making it a felony to
provide “material support or resources” to a designated foreign terrorist
organization;18 and in the U.K., sections 11 of the Terrorism Act 2000,
prohibits belonging or professing to belong to a proscribed
organization.19 Similar Acts were enacted in Germany, Israel, Australia,

18 In addition, 18 U.S.C. § 2339(A) (2000) makes it an offence to provide material
   support or resources, knowing or intending that they be used in preparation for, or in
   carrying out, a violation of various criminal prohibitions associated with terrorism.
19 For a discussion of the compatibility of this Act with the Human Rights Act 1998,
   see, e.g., R (On the Application of the Kurdistan Workers’ Party and Others) v.
   Secretary of State for the Home Department, [2002] EWHC 644 (Admin.) (Eng.);
   and R v. Sheldrake and AG’s Reference (No. 4 of 2002), [2004] UKHL 43, [2005] 1
14                                                   《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯



Canada, and more. 20 Legislation is also prevalent regarding other
prohibitions on supporting terror, including norms prohibiting financing
terror organizations and incitement to terrorism.

       In addition to legislating crimes of supporting terror organizations,
several democracies enacted special rules regarding criminal procedures
against suspected terrorists. A notable example is the U.S. enactment of
the Classified Information Procedures Act (CIPA), which allows judges
to approve the use of redaction, substitution and other methods meant to
reconcile a defendant’s rights with the government’s obligation to
preserve the secrecy of sensitive information. Israel is another notable
example in this respect. The Israeli legislature has enacted statutes which
derogate several procedural rights of suspected terrorists.21 In many
democracies explicit legislation empowers holding suspected terrorists
in a civil detention for periods that exceed the generally applicable


     A.C. 264.
20 For a review, see Liat Levanon, Criminal Prohibitions on Membership in Terrorist
     Organisations, 15 NEW CRIM. L. REV. 224 (2012).
21 For instance, the Criminal Procedure (Enforcement Powers-Detentions) Law, 1996,
     compels investigation authorities to inform a relative of a person detained and a
     lawyer of his or her choice about the detention; but according to this law, in the case
     of persons suspect of terrorist activities the Court may exempt security agencies
     from the requirement to inform someone about the detention for up to 15 days,
     “whenever the Minister of Defense approved that the State’s security compels
     keeping the detention secret” (sections 33 and 36). The same is true in respect to the
     right to counsel. The Criminal Procedure (Enforcement Powers-Detentions) Law,
     1996, compels investigation authorities to enable a detainee to counsel with a lawyer.
     However, this law authorizes infringing this right for up to 10 days whenever the
     detainee is accused in “security” offenses (sections 34 and 35). Additional legislation
     include the Criminal Procedure Act (A Detainee Accused in a Security Offence)
     (Temporary Provision), 2006, which empowers the government to infringe other
     basic liberties of persons who are suspected terrorists, and the Criminal Procedures
     Act (Criminal Investigations), 2002, which provides a general exemption from the
     duty of written or video documentation of interrogations in the case of investigating
     a person accused of terror related offenses (section 17).
Keynote Address: Legislating Responses to Security Threats                          15



norms.22

     The same is true with respect to military commissions. As this
measure is not aimed at preemption but primarily at retribution and
deterrence, the powers of military commissions to try suspected
terrorists is regulated in legislation. In the U.S., such legislation, the
Military Commissions Act of 2006, was enacted only following a
judicial decision (in the Hamdan case) that such legislation is required to
try suspected terrorists in such tribunals, at least for crimes which do not
amount to war crimes.23 In other countries such legislation was enacted
without judicial intervention.

     Military or administrative detentions are not always authorized in
legislation. However, it seems that there is a pattern of a growing
involvement of the legislature in authorizing and regulating employing
the power to hold suspected terrorists in a military detention. The debate
in this respect is whether administrative detention should be viewed, at
least for the purpose of the requirement of legislation, similar to the
power to hold enemy combatants as prisoners-of-war (POW). This latter
power is conceived as invested in the powers of the Executive Branch,
making domestic legislation unnecessary. While suspected-terrorists do
not enjoy the status of POW’s under the laws of war, one may argue that
the power to detain them, for preventive purposes, should be similarly
part of the powers of the government. Following this view, the U.S.
Congress has declined to address this issue of military detention without

22 For instance, the USA Patriot Act of 2001 allows the U.S. attorney general to detain
   alien without charge for seven days; in the UK, Schedule 8 of the Terrorism Act of
   2000 regulates terrorists pre-charge detention; in Australia, Section 23DA Crimes
   Act 1914; and in Israel, the Criminal Procedure Act (A Detainee Accused in a
   Security Offence) (Temporary Provision), 2006.
23 Hamdan, 548 U.S. at 636.
16                                                  《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯



trial in any detail. The prevailing view is that since military detention
aims to incapacitate in order to prevent future harm in battle, this
measure is part of the President’s War Powers. Thus, in the Hamdi case
(2004) the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the government can hold even
an American citizen in detention without explicit legislative
authorization. It ruled that the general authorization provided by the
AUMF is sufficient for this purpose.24

      This view is doubtful. According to the laws of war, a person can be
detained only if he is a member of enemy armed forces.25 The affiliation
of suspected terrorists, mainly those who are not detained in the battle
field, is typically questionable. In this respect the U.S. Supreme Court
insisted in Hamdi (regarding U.S. citizens) and in Rasul (regarding
aliens) that the power to hold a person in detention exists only once it is
sufficiently clear that the individual is, in fact, an enemy combatant; and
absent explicit legislation stating otherwise, the detainee is entitled that
this issue will be reviewed through a judicial process. 26 The U.S.
Congress reacted by enacting the Detainee Treatment Act of 2005 (and
then again the Military Commissions Act of 2006) which explicitly
eliminated statutory habeas jurisdiction for Guantanamo detainees,

24 Hamdi, 542 U.S. at 519 (“…it is of no moment that the AUMF does not use specific
   language of detention. Because detention to prevent a combatant’s return to the
   battlefield is a fundamental incident of waging war, in permitting the use of
   ‘necessary and appropriate force,’ Congress has clearly and unmistakably authorized
   detention in the narrow circumstances considered here.”).
25 Article 21 of the Third Geneva Convention authorizes parties international armed
   conflicts to detain during hostilities any individual who qualifies as a prisoner of war,
   and article 4(A) in turn specifies six categories of persons who fall under that
   heading, including: membership in enemy armed forces, membership in an armed
   force that professes allegiance to an unrecognized government, persons authorized to
   accompany such forces, and those who crew merchant marine vessels or civilian
   aircraft.
26 Hamdi, 542 U.S. at 532-36; Rasul v. Bush, 542 U.S. 466, 480-85 (2004).
Keynote Address: Legislating Responses to Security Threats                               17



replacing it with another framework of judicial review.

      In Israel, the power of administrative detention is authorized in a
detailed legislation. The central provision is the Emergency Powers
(Detentions) Law, 1979. The Israeli Supreme Court ruled that this power
can only be used as a forward-looking preventive measure, against a
person who poses an individual threat, and may not be used as
punishment for past acts.27 The Court held that “a person should not be
detained merely because he has been detained during warfare. …The
circumstances of his detention must be such that they raise the suspicion
that he—he individually and no one else—presents a danger to
security.”28 In response, the Israeli legislature enacted a new legislation
(without revoking the earlier one)—the Internment of Unlawful
Combatants Law, 2002, which authorizes the state to intern persons who
are classified as “unlawful combatants,” to bypass the requirement of
proving the detainee’s individual dangerousness.29

      In the U.K., the Prevention of Terrorism Act of 2005 empowers
placing “control orders” (including detention) on “dangerous”


27 See, e.g., HCJ 5784/03 Salama v. Israel Defence Forces Commander in Judea and
   Samaria 57(6) PD 721, para. 7 [2003] (President Barak) (Isr.): “The basic premise is
   that administrative detention is meant to prevent future danger to the security of the
   state or to the public safety. Administrative detention is not meant to be a tool used to
   punish previous acts, or to be used in place of criminal proceedings.” English
   translation available at: http://elyon1.court.gov.il/Files_ENG/03/840/057/A05/0305
   7840.A05.HTM.
28 HCJ 3239/02 Marab v. IDF Commander in the West Bank 57(2) PD 349, para. 23
   [2003] (President Barak) (Isr.). The Court added in this respect that the army is not
   authorized to make “mass detentions.” Id. English translation available at http://
   elyon1.court.gov.il/Files_ENG/02/390/032/A04/02032390.A04.pdf.
29 However, the Israeli Supreme Court ruled that this law should be interpreted such
   that the individual dangerousness requirement is applied. See CrimA 6659/06 A v.
   The State of Israel [2008]. English Translation available at http://elyon1.court.gov.il/
   Files_ENG/06/590/066/n04/06066590.n04.htm.
18                                                《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯



individuals. In Canada, detention of suspected terrorists is made under
the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act.30 Other countries did not
enact specific legislation of this kind. In Germany, for instance, laws
enable a detention for public safety reasons, but for very limited periods
of several days.

3. Interrogations and Information Gathering

       Democracies tend to authorize in legislation powers related to
interrogations and information gathering, but in the context of the fight
against terrorism such legislation is often quite lax. On the one hand,
legislation prohibiting the use of force in interrogations, and certainly
torture is prevalent. For instance, in the U.S. both Federal and State
legislation forbids torture or other like-torture methods by security
forces.31 In Germany, in addition to explicit legislation, such probation
is entrenched in the Basic-Law.32 In Australia various legislated norms
prohibit torture.33 And in the U.K., the Human Rights Act incorporates


30 This Act was reviewed in Charkaoui v. Canada (Citizenship and Immigration) [2007]
     1 S.C.R. 350 (Can.).
31 The Federal Torture Statute, 18 U.S.C. §§ 2340-2340(A). This issue is determined in
   a more elaborated way in non-legislative norms, such as the Army Field Manual 2
   22.3, and Executive Order No. 13440, and No. 13491, “Ensuring lawful
   interrogations.” See WHITE HOUSE, http://www.whitehouse.gov/the_press_office/
   EnsuringLawfulInterrogations/ (last visited May15, 2012).
32 Article 104(I) of the Basic-Law states that “persons in custody may not be subjected
   to mental or physical mistreatment.” See also Section 136(a) to the German Criminal
   Procedure Code, which sets additional ground rules to police officers in regards to
   interrogation.
33 See Commonwealth Criminal Code (Cth) § 268.13, § 268.25, and § 268.73. Torture
   is also made criminal by the Human Rights Act of 2004 § 10(1). See also
   Australian Security and Intelligence Organisation Act 1979 (Cth) § 34T, which states
   that a person questioned should “be treated with humanity and with respect for
   human dignity, and must not be subjected to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
   by anyone exercising authority under the warrant or implementing or enforcing the
   direction.”
Keynote Address: Legislating Responses to Security Threats                        19



the European Convention on Human Rights, and thus sets forth the
prohibition on torture.34

     On the other hand, legislation often provides extensive powers to
gather information. For instance, the USA Patriot Act (Sections 215, 206)
and the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Act of 2004 (Section 6001),
implement extensive measures for wiretap, tracing persons and
collecting data on U.S. citizens, and permit secret intelligence
surveillance on non-U.S. citizens. In Germany, the Federal Intelligence
Service Law 1990 authorizes the Federal Intelligence Service to “gather
intelligence... about foreign countries” and “gather all the necessary
information.” Similarly, in the U.K. the Security Service Act 1989 and
the Intelligence Services Act 1994, which provides the legal framework
of the British intelligence agencies, do not detail any limitation on
information gathering methods by the relevant agencies. In Australia too,
the Intelligence Services Act 2001 only determines the functions of
Australia’s intelligence agencies, without specifying the actions allowed
in obtaining information about non-Australian citizens, whereas the
Telecommunication (Interception) Act 1979 and its amendments
imposes several restrictions regarding wiretapping Australian citizens. In
Israel, the Wiretap Law, 1979 prohibits investigation authorities to
engage in wiretaps, unless authorized to do so, for the purpose of
preventing high crimes, by a court order. However, the law exempts
security agencies from this requirement, and authorizes them to wiretap
“whenever needed for security reasons,” subject only to the approval of


34 However, the Anti-terrorism, Crime and Security Act of 2001, and mainly the Code
   of Practice for the Detention, Treatment and Questioning of Persons by Police
   Officers (Code C), which was instituted under authority of the Police and Criminal
   Evidence Act of 1984, elaborates the scope of legitimate forms of questioning and
   interrogations.
20                                          《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯



the Minister of Defense (Section 4).

4. Summary

     The comparative analysis presents a mixed picture. While the last
decade has witnessed a growing involvement of legislatures in
delineating what measures can legitimately be employed and in what
circumstances, this legislation is limited mostly to authorizing measures
employed within the territory and target citizens, and only scarcely one
can find legislation authorizing “military” anti-terrorist activities taken
abroad. Moreover, while such legislation does impose some restrictions
on the use of force, reflecting an interest in achieving appropriate
“balancing” between security and liberty, the more dominant purpose is
to legitimize the use of certain measures that were otherwise considered
prohibited.



II. Positive Evaluation of the Decision whether to
    Legislate: Legal and Political Considerations

     The preceding discussion shows that legislatures often take a rather
minimalist approach in determining the legitimacy of decisions taken by
the Executive Branch in the fight on terror. The following discussion
briefly outlines the underlying reasons of the decision to legislate certain
aspects of this fight and to avoid it in others. The discussion refers to two
main types of considerations in deciding whether or not to enact—legal
and political ones. It aims at explaining the current legal doctrine
regarding the requirement to provide explicit legislative authorization,
and the reluctance of legislatures when such a requirement does not
apply.
Keynote Address: Legislating Responses to Security Threats                      21



1. The Requirement of Explicit Legislative Authorization

     The Legal doctrine regarding the requirement of explicit legislative
authorization is somewhat ambiguous, but it can be summarized
according to the following main elements. One aspect, which is relevant
only in Presidential regimes, is whether the legislature has the power to
legislate in these areas. The doctrine known in the U.S. as “War
Powers,” suggests that decisions of the president related to a war or
national crisis are beyond the reach of statutory law. According to one
view, as long as a country is at war with terrorist organizations, “the full
panoply of presidential power in time of war comes into play.”35 The
result is that the legislature is not authorized to restrain the President, as
the Commander-in-Chief, to employ certain anti-terrorist measures.
However, this view is generally rejected. The fight on terror is made
“within the law,” and legislated and court-made law bind the Executive
Branch.36

     One type of cases in which legislated authorization is required is
when specific legislation prohibits the use of a certain measure. The
authorization is then required to override the legislated prohibition. An
example is the U.S. case of Hamdi (2004). The Court there was split on
whether the AUMF provides sufficient legislated authority to hold a U.S.
citizen in military detention.37 The important point is, however, that all
Justices based their view that such an authorization is required on an

35 John C. Eastman, Listening to the Enemy: The President’s Power to Conduct
   Surveillance of Enemy Communications During Time of War, 13 ILSA J. INT’L &
   COMP. L. 1, 5 (2006). For a similar view, see, e.g., JOHN YOO, THE POWERS OF WAR
   AND PEACE: THE CONSTITUTION AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS AFTER 9/11, at 8-20 (2006).
36 VICTOR M. HANSEN & LAWRENCE FRIEDMAN, THE CASE FOR CONGRESS: SEPARATION
   OF POWERS AND THE WAR ON TERROR 2 (2009).
37 Hamdi, 542 U.S. at 517.
22                                          《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯



existing legislation—the Non-Detention Act of 1971. This Act states that
“[n]o citizen shall be imprisoned or otherwise detained by the United
States except pursuant to an Act of Congress.” Similarly, in the case of
Hamdan (2006) the Court ruled that an explicit legislated authority is
required, and it based this position on its ruling that an existing
legislation, the Uniform Code of Military Justice, prohibits trying
suspected terrorists in military commissions for crimes which do not
amount to war crimes.38 In such instances the requirement of legislation
is thus based on concrete existing norms.

     Anti-terrorist    measures    that   typically   require    legislative
authorization on this basis are those that involve trying a suspect at the
criminal justice system. The norms of criminal procedure and criminal
law are of general applicability, and to implement more stringent rules in
trying suspected terrorists, an explicit overriding legislation is required.
Existing legislation that prohibits the government from taking certain
measures can also be expected regarding powers that may infringe basic
liberties of the general public, such as privacy infringing surveillance
measures, as well as measures that were inappropriately employed in the
past in the relevant country.

     An interesting issue in this category of cases is whether the finding
that a certain measure is incompatible with the relevant norms of
international law would serve as a basis for requiring an explicit
authorization in law as a prerequisite to justifying taking such measure.
This is clearly the case when the relevant international law norm is part
of the domestic law. This is also true when an existing legislation is
interpreted as excluding a prohibition to take a certain measure only if


38 Hamdan, 548 U.S. at 636.
Keynote Address: Legislating Responses to Security Threats                          23



employing this measure is permitted according to international law. This
was the case, for instance, in Hamdan, where Article 21 of the Uniform
Code of Military Justice permitted trying a person by a military
commission only “with respect to offenders or offenses that by …the law
of war may be tried by military commissions;”39 and this was the case
in Hamdi, where the AUMF, which was viewed as permitting the
government to override the prohibition set forth by the Non-Detention
Act only as long as the measures violating this Act are permitted
according to the laws of war.40 Another example is the Israeli Supreme
Court decisions that invalidated certain anti-terrorist measures taken by
the government on the basis of their incompatibility with relevant
international law norms. Here too, to override such rulings an explicit
legislation is inevitable.

     Legislation may also be required based on constitutional doctrines.
It is generally accepted that a measure which infringes upon entrenched
constitutional rights must be authorized in legislation. This norm
expands the criminal law principle of legality (nullum crimen sine lege).
In many democracies this doctrine is explicit in the constitutional text.
For instance, in Canada, Section 1 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and
Freedoms guarantees that the rights set out in the Charter may be limited
as “prescribed by law.”41 In Germany, Article 80(1) of the German
Basic Law stipulates that “the Federal Government, a Federal Minister,
or the Land governments may be authorized by a law to issue statutory

39 Id. at 717-18.
40 Hamdi, 542 U.S. at 541.
41 Constitution Act, 1982. This requirement was the basis of numerous decisions that
   invalidated certain measures. For instance, see, e.g., R v. Therens, [1985] 1 S.C.R.
   613 (Can.); R. v. Simmons, [1988] 2 S.C.R 495 (Can.) (the right to counsel cannot
   be denied without explicit legislative authorization); R. v. Dersch, [1993] 3 S.C.R.
   768 (Can.) (access medical records by the police).
24                                             《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯



instruments. The content, purpose, and scope of the authority conferred
shall be specified in the law.” And in Israel, according to Article 8 of the
Basic-Law: Human Dignity and Liberty, it is impermissible to infringe
human rights unless the infringement is prescribed by law.

       This principle is accepted in other democracies as well. For
instance, in the U.S., the Supreme Court ruled in the Youngstown case
that the President’s War Powers do not trump the requirement of
legislative authorization whenever he seeks to infringe basic liberties.
The Court ruled that the framers did not contemplate “that the title
commander-in-chief of the Army and Navy” would also make the
President “Commander-in-Chief of the country, its industries and its
inhabitants.”42 It ruled that notwithstanding the existence of war, to
pursue the domestic action of seizing steel mills the President would
have to follow the rules set by Congress. As the Court added in Hamdi,
“a state of war is not a blank check for the President when it comes to
the rights of the Nation’s citizens. Whatever power the United States
Constitution envisions for the Executive in its exchanges with other
nations or with enemy organizations in times of conflict, it most
assuredly envisions a role for all three branches when individual liberties
are at stake.”43

       Several aspects of the scope of this doctrine are contested. One
aspect is how detailed and precise the authorization should be. Under the
prevailing approach, following the European Court of Human Rights
decision in the Sunday Times case, “a norm cannot be regarded as ‘law’
unless formulated with sufficient precision to enable the citizen to

42 Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer, 343 U.S. 579, 643-44 (1952) (Jackson J.,
     concurring).
43 Hamdi, 542 U.S. at 536.
Keynote Address: Legislating Responses to Security Threats                             25



regulate his conduct.”44 In practice, courts do not insist on substantial
involvement of the legislature in authorizing the scope and type of the
infringement. Often, norms which confer governmental officials with
wide discretion are recognized as limitations “prescribed by law,”
notwithstanding the Non Delegation doctrine. Some jurisdictions apply a
sliding-scale approach, which adjust the level of precision required in
legislation to the intensity of the infringement. In some instances courts
ruled that a statute that confers discretion may well be read as to deny
acts which infringe constitutional rights.45

      The main difficulty is the decision in what instances an
infringement of basic liberties is recognized. According to the prevailing
view, human rights law applies only within the territory and not when
traditional actions of war are taken.46 Instances of international armed
conflict, and by stipulation also instances of a fight against terrorist
organizations abroad, are typically subject to the laws of war rather than
to domestic or international human rights law, at least in the context of
the requirement that the infringement will be “proscribed by law.” For

44 Sunday Times v. United Kingdom, 2 Eur. Lt. H.R. Rep. 245, 270-73 (1980).
45 One example is the Canadian Supreme Court decision in Slaight Communications
   Inc. v. Davidson, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1038, 1077 (Can.), that “it is impossible to
   interpret legislation conferring discretion as conferring a power to infringe the
   Charter, unless, of course, that power is expressly conferred or necessarily
   implied. …Legislation conferring an imprecise discretion must therefore be
   interpreted as not allowing the Charter rights to be infringed.” Another example of
   this approach is the Israeli Supreme Court decision in HCJ 3267/97 Rubinstein v.
   Minister of Defense 52(5) PD 481 [1998] (Isr.), in which it held that the power to
   exempt persons from the draft should not be interpreted to include the authority do
   so on a collective basis, as this would amount to an infringement of the right to
   equality, which must be explicitly decided by the legislature.
46 This view somewhat resembles Cass Sunstein’s interpretation of the Hamdan
   decision as one which requires “clear congressional authorization [whenever] the
   executive seeks to intrude into the realm of liberty or departs from practices that are
   historically entrenched.” Cass R. Sunstein, Clear Statement Principles and National
   Security: Hamdan and Beyond, 2006 SUP. CT. REV. 1, 5 (2007).
26                                                   《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯



instance, the Israeli Supreme Court does apply, as a routine, both
humanitarian international law doctrines and domestic human right law
in its review of measures taken in Israel’s fight against terror in occupied
territories; but the provisions of the domestic Basic Law: Human Dignity
and Liberty are applied only with respect to the evaluation whether
infringements are justified. The requirement that the measure will be
proscribed by law is not enforced. In the handful of cases in which the
Court did refer to this requirement in addressing measures taken within
the occupied territories it applied a very lenient approach, such that a
very broad authorization was held sufficient to fulfill this requirement.

       Courts hardly insist on legislative authorization outside the realm of
human rights law. An interesting exception to this view was offered by
the Israeli Supreme Court’s 1998 Rubinstein case. The Court ruled there
that employing contested powers, ones which involve substantive moral
dilemmas or raise public and political dispute, must be resolved in
legislation: “The people’s elected representatives must adopt substantive
decisions regarding State policies. …[T]o the extent that the regulation
of a particular area requires that fundamental decisions which
substantially affect the lives of individuals and society be taken, it is
appropriate that such decisions be made within the confines of the statute
itself.”47 However, in practice the Court applies this doctrine, to limit
the government’s powers, only when it recognizes a human right
infringement.48 Take, for instance, the decision to erect the Separation


47 HCJ 3267/97 Rubinstein v. Minister of Defense 52(5) PD 481 [1998] (Isr.).
48 In 1999 the Court implemented this doctrine by holding that it is impermissible to
     use coercive interrogation methods, not even in the case of a “ticking bomb,” at least
     as long as no explicit authorization to do so is promulgated in legislation. HCJ
     5100/94 Public Committee against Torture in Israel v. Government of Israel 53(4)
     PD 817 [1999] (Isr.).
Keynote Address: Legislating Responses to Security Threats                27



Barrier (“the Wall”), outside the Israeli territory. This is a project of
unprecedented scale, in terms of its financial costs, its large scale effect
on Palestinians who live close to it, and the potential political
consequences of this project. The project, which included confiscating
land, and denying entry to certain areas, was approved by the Court,
notwithstanding the lack of legislation authorizing it, based exclusively
on (expansive) interpretation of norms of humanitarian international law.
The same is true with respect to the policy of “targeted killings,” and
other military measures.

2. The Decision whether to Legislate: Political Considerations

     The decision whether to enact norms that relate to governmental
powers in general, and to the fight against terrorism in particular, may be
based on three main types of considerations—functional, deliberative
and symbolic ones. The central element is the functional aspect.
Legislation may serve to either legitimize an otherwise prohibited
governmental measure or to prohibit an otherwise legitimate one. This
consideration is contingent on two background conditions. The first is
the governing constitutional norms, mainly the scope of judicial review
of governmental activities, and the enforcement of the requirement of
explicit legislative authorization as a prerequisite to employ certain
powers. A second relevant aspect is the legislature’s political motivation
to restrain the government. Legislation that restrains the government can
be expected when such intervention is required (mainly since the
judiciary fails to effectively scrutinize the Executive Branch’s actions),
and the majority in parliament is willing to confront the government.
Respectively, a functionally-based permissive legislation is expected in
response to an activist court, and a parliamentary support of the
government (based either on the legislature serving as a mere rubber-
28                                           《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯



stamp of the government’s policies, or on an ideological position that the
government should hold the powers under dispute). A related functional
role of legislation is not only to set policies but also to direct behavior of
soldiers and other officials. A permissive legislation may serve to shield
soldiers from the risk of criminal liability, and a prohibitive one may be
aimed at deterring them from taking certain measures. Here too the
background rules matters. For instance, if the criminal law defense of
lawful capacity of office, which provides that a person shall not be
criminally liable for an act which he has a duty, or is authorized, by law,
to do, applies when soldiers act pursuant to the laws of armed conflict,
domestic legislation is not required for this purpose.

     The two other considerations are more nuanced. The deliberative
aspect refers to the process of legislation, rather than its outcome. This
process serves as a forum for public deliberation on the disputed issue.
Thus, the decision whether to legislate is also a result of the prevailing
political culture regarding the question whether inducing such an open
deliberation is desirable or not. A strategy of parliamentary deference to
the Executive Brach may thus be the result of a principled position that
the proper division of powers between the two branches requires
assigning the government with limitless discretion in the current context.

     The third consideration, the symbolic one, has to do with the
outcome of the legislative process, but unlike the functional aspect, the
current one emphasizes the informal consequences of legislation.
Typically, the explicit authorization in legislation to hold certain powers
or to take certain measures, including ones that infringe basic human
rights or even deontological constraints, may have adverse symbolic and
(both domestic and international) political consequences. Here too, the
decision whether to legislate or not can be expected to take these aspects
Keynote Address: Legislating Responses to Security Threats                               29



into account, based on an evaluation of their scope and nature in the
relevant circumstances.

      In general, legislatures do not show an interest, independent of that
of the government, in restricting or otherwise delineating the powers of
the Executive Branch. Times of armed conflicts and threats to terror
activities are characterized by a high level of uncertainty and ambiguity.
The choice of security measures is based on an integration of
complicated body of data, some of it confidential, some of it missing or
indefinite. The stakes are high, and imposing or enforcing restraints by
the parliament on the use of certain types of military force is typically
perceived as a politically unrewarding activity.49 It is not surprising then
that legislatures in liberal democracies employ a rather minimalist
approach in regulating the fight against terrorism, as discussed above.

      From the government’s perspective, legislation is typically costly,
in terms of both the requirement of holding extensive deliberations and


49 For a similar evaluation of minor rule of Congress in regulating the US war on terror,
   see, e.g., Jerry L. Mashaw, Due Process of Governance: Terror, the Rule of Law, and
   the Limits of Institutional Design, 22 GOVERNANCE: INT’L J. POL’Y, ADMIN. & INST.
   353, 363 (2009) (“Congress has revealed itself to be a weak reed, indeed. …Faced
   with a direct executive branch challenge to its authority to regulate electronic
   surveillance, Congress essentially legalized the administration’s extralegal practices.
   A Congress threatened with political responsibility for making Americans less safe
   seems to be a Congress determined to maintain that responsibility in the executive
   branch, even at the cost of delegating the responsibility to protect basic legal and
   procedural rights to that branch as well.”); Bruce Ackerman & Oona Hathaway,
   Limited War and the Constitution: Iraq and the Crisis of Presidential Legality, 109
   MICH. L. REV. 447, 450-51 (2011) (“President Bush put Congress in an untenable
   position. If it refused funding to enforce its statutory limitations on the war, it would
   be accused of abandoning the troops in the field. This was too high a political price
   to pay to force the president to retreat from Iraq, as the initial congressional
   authorization required. …The strategic use of emergency appropria-tions allowed the
   president to engage in ‘bait-and-switch’ tactics that undermined effective democratic
   control over the use of military force.”).
30                                                 《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯



the symbolic effects of ex-ante explicit authorization to infringe basic
liberties. As long as the scope of judicial review is “bearable” in terms of
the measures it prevents the government from taking, the above costs are
usually prohibitive. The judicial scrutiny imposes a cost on the
government, as it prohibits the government from taking the measures it
deems appropriate and necessary in its fight against terrorism. When the
gap between the political majority’s views about this issue and the
activities permitted by the judiciary is large enough, sufficiently high
cost of the latter type is generated, and the government finds it justified
initiating legislation and bearing the costs associated with it. Accordingly,
the higher the above-mentioned costs of legislation that is aimed at
overriding judicial decisions, the wider the judiciary’s power to impose
its positions about what measures may be legitimately employed, and
vice verse.50 Therefore, one can expect permissive legislation mainly
when this is legally necessary, as discussed above.

      Finally, it should be noted that even when there is a functional
interest in prescribing a certain measure in law, the political costs of such
legislation are often prohibitive. Consider in this respect the Israeli
experience. The Israeli Supreme Court employs a relatively activist
approach in reviewing the legitimacy of various military activities.51 In


50 Cf. Samuel Issacharoff & Richard H. Pildes, Emergency Contexts without
   Emergency Powers: The United States’ Constitutional Approach to Rights During
   Wartime, 2 INT’L J. CONST. L. 296 (2004) (suggesting that where both legislature and
   executive endorse a particular tradeoff of liberty and security, the courts have
   accepted that judgment; but where the executive has flown in the face of legislative
   policies or without legislative approval, the courts have invalidated executive action,
   even during wartime, or scrutinized it more closely).
51 See, e.g., Yoav Dotan, Legalising the Unlegaliseable: Terrorism, Secret Services and
   Judicial Review in Israel 1970–2001, in JUDICIAL REVIEW AND BUREAUCRATIC
   IMPACT: INTERNATIONAL AND INTERDISCIPLINARY PERSPECTIVES 190 (Mark Hertogh
   & Simon Halliday eds., 2004).
Keynote Address: Legislating Responses to Security Threats                            31



a few cases, the Court declared anti-terrorist measures explicitly
authorized in legislation invalid.52 However, the government, and thus
the Israeli parliament too, have been reluctant to enact norms that
override these judicial decisions. In most cases the Court based the
decision on its interpretation of both the Israeli Constitution and the
norms of IHL. It thus indicated that a legislation legitimizing the
prohibited measures would be perceived as overriding not only the
Court’s ruling but also the dictates of IHL. For these reasons, the Court’s
greater activism made the process of enacting laws to override it more
expansive for the government, and consequently only in a handful of
cases it chose to initiate a legislation process. In the majority of the cases,
most notable of which is the prohibition against the use of coercive
measures in interrogation, the government preferred “to bite the bullet,”
and chose not to ask for legislative approval of such activities.



III. The Appropriate Role of the Legislature

     The decision what role the legislature should play should be based
on general, universal considerations, but it clearly has a substantial local



52 HCJ 8823/07 John Does v. The State of Israel, 10(4) PD 312 [2010] (Isr.), in which
   the Court invalidated section 5 of the Criminal Procedure Act (A Detainee Accused
   in a Security Offence) (Temporary Provision), 2006, which authorized the
   government to ask, and the court to approve to hold the court hearings on extending
   the period of detention without the detainee’s presence; HCJ 8276/05 Adalah Legal
   Centre for Arab Minority Rights in Israel v. Minister of Defense, 62(1) PD 1 [2006]
   (Isr.), in which the Court invalidated a provision denying persons harmed in “conflict
   zones” in the Occupied Territories from the right to receive compensations. English
   translation available at http://elyon1.court.gov.il/files_eng/05/760/082/a13/050827
   60.a13.pdf.
32                                               《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯



and contextual dimension.53 For simplicity, the following discussion
focuses on general aspects.

     Supporters of the view that the Executive Branch should hold
“inherent” powers to employ all measures it deems necessary in
response to security threats base their position primarily on the view that
the benefits of insisting on legislation are marginal. As discussed above,
the legislature may be expected to mostly legitimize employing certain
measures rather than to restrain the government, making the requirement
of ex-ante legislative authorization superfluous. Accordingly, a
legislation which restricts the executive to act efficiently in response to
threats is dangerous; whereas legislation such as the one adopted by the
U.S. Congress almost immediately following the 9/11 attacks (the
AUMF), which simply authorized the president to use all “necessary and
appropriate force” to subdue the perpetrators of that attack, their allies,
and supporters, is meaningless.54 It is also suggested that requiring
legislation is costly. Arguably, it is difficult, or even impossible to predict


53 For an analysis which accentuates the contextual dimension (distinguishing between
   different types of powers), see, e.g., Barak-Erez, supra note 5, at 886-91. For
   localized comparisons, see, e.g., Michael J. Glennon, The United States: Democracy,
   Hegemony, and Accountability, in DEMOCRATIC ACCOUNTABILITY AND THE USE OF
   FORCE IN INTERNATIONAL LAW 323 (Charlotte Ku & Harold K. Jacobson eds., 2003);
   Georg Nolte, Germany: Ensuring Political Legitimacy for the Use of Military Forces
   by Requiring Constitutional Accountability, in DEMOCRATIC ACCOUNTABILITY AND
   THE USE OF FORCE IN INTERNATIONAL LAW 231 (Charlotte Ku & Harold K. Jacobson
   eds., 2003); Yves Boyer et al., France: Security Council Legitimacy and Executive
   Primacy, in DEMOCRATIC ACCOUNTABILITY AND THE USE OF FORCE IN
   INTERNATIONAL LAW 280 (Charlotte Ku & Harold K. Jacobson eds., 2003); Nigel D.
   White, The United Kingdom: Increasing Commitment Requires Greater
   Parliamentary Involvement, in DEMOCRATIC ACCOUNTABILITY AND THE USE OF
   FORCE IN INTERNATIONAL LAW 300 (Charlotte Ku & Harold K. Jacobson eds., 2003).
54 See, e.g., Barak-Erez, supra note 5, at 883-84 (“executive orders that are solely
   based on blank authorization in a statutory text …should be regarded as falling
   within the scope of the executive model.”).
Keynote Address: Legislating Responses to Security Threats                          33



what types of measures will be required in response to possible security
threats. In addition, as mentioned above, the explicit authorization in
legislation to hold certain powers may have adverse symbolic
consequences.

     I find these arguments unpersuasive. To my view, enforcing the
requirement of legislation is justified. I start by addressing benefits of the
requirement of explicit statutory authorization. I then move to discuss
the concerns and suggest the appropriate scope of required legislation.

1. The Benefits of Requiring Legislated Authorization

     Insisting on legislation is expected to induce three main benefits: it
imposes the representatives to take direct and formal part in a
deliberation on the relevant aims and means, which may have a
substantial effect of on actual outcomes; it increases the likelihood that
the legislature would scrutinize governmental activities; and it requires
the government to act on the basis of general, predefined norms.

     Deliberative Aspects of Legislation. The democratic principle of
citizens’ equal participation in delineating the circumstances under
which infringements of basic liberties should be deemed permissible
lends support to legislative ordering of this issue, following public
deliberation.55 It also provides the executive with an explicit expression
of popular support, which is often needed in order to take extreme
measures.56 But the most important benefit of requiring legislation is


55 See, e.g., JEREMY WALDRON, LAW AND DISAGREEMENT 232-34, 244-49 (1999).
56 Ferejohn & Pasquino, supra note 5, at 220 (“This need for legitimation is chronic in
   modern democracies, and that it helps explain the emergence of legislative
   emergency powers, whereby the legislature provides a measure of democratic
   support for the executive’s actions.”).
34                                                   《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯



probably the public deliberation which the process of legislation
induces.57

      The process of legislation produces an open discussion, which
requires the decision-makers to present their empirical evaluations of the
relevant risks and the expected efficacy of the measures under
consideration to tackle these risks.58 It also requires them to explicitly
state their moral positions, including, for instance, what weight should
be given to the rights of “enemy civilians,” how to address uncertainties,
and so forth.59 The public debate and deliberation that is part of the
parliamentary process also serves the vital function of informing
constituents.

      Essentially, the deliberative process may well shape preferences,
rather than merely restating attitudes.60 Parliamentary deliberation over

57 Frank Michelman, Relative Constraint and Public Reason: What Is “The Work We
   Expect of Law”?, 67 BROOK. L. REV. 963, 977 (2002); Barak-Erez, supra note 5, at
   894-95.
58 Barak-Erez, supra note 5, at 891 (“Whereas the specifics concerning the
   implementation of some anti-terrorism measures should remain undisclosed, the
   basic features of the methods used should be open to public criticism and debate.”).
59 For a similar view, see, e.g., Craig Martin, Taking War Seriously: A Model for
   Constitutional Constraints on the Use of Force in Compliance with International
   Law, 76 BROOK. L. REV. 611 (2011) (advocates enforcing a constitutional
   requirement that the legislature approve any use of force rising above a de minimus
   level, since the legislative process results in better decisions due to the attenuation of
   extreme positions, the canvassing of a wider range of perspectives and sources of
   information, and the vigorous public interrogation of reasons and motives underlying
   proposals.); Owen Greene, Democratic Governance and the Internationalisation of
   Security Policy: The Relevance of Parliaments, in THE “DOUBLE DEMOCRATIC
   DEFICIT” 28 (Hans Born & Heiner Hänggi eds., 2004).
60 Paul F. Diehl & Tom Ginsburg, Irrational War and Constitutional Design: A Reply to
   Professors Nzilebe and Yoo, 27 MICH. J. INT’L L. 1239, 1249-50 (2006) (deliberative
   process involves the transformation of preferences, rather than merely serving as a
   means by which society can aggregate preferences); see also AMY GUTMANN &
   DENNIS THOMPSON, WHY DELIBERATIVE DEMOCRACY? 1-20 (2004); DELIBERATIVE
   DEMOCRACY (Jon Elster ed., 1998).
Keynote Address: Legislating Responses to Security Threats                                35



the constitutionality of the use of force is an essential element of
democratic decision-making, as it serves to rebut moral disagreements
by conducting a debate which is based on reason and that can be
justifiable by everyone.61 More than any other form of deliberation, the
process of legislation increases the chances that the tragic choices
involved in responding to security threats are approached under what
John Rawls calls a “constraint of Public Reason.” According to this
constraint, “[p]articipants in social decisions must stand ready to explain
the consonance of their positions with some conception of a complete,
legitimating constitutional agreement.”62 Recognizing the crucial role in
a democratic society of the appeal to “public reason” in justifying the
use of force, and of public deliberation in general, serves as an important
justification of the requirement of ex ante authorization in legislation.

      This is especially true in the current context, in which the
conflicting interests are usually not represented. The harms of anti-
terrorist measures are typically inflicted on non-citizens, such as the

61 Chi-Ting Tsai, Presidential War Power in the Deliberative Moment—An Empirical
   Study of Congressional Constitutional Deliberation and Balance of War Power
   (Working Paper, 2010) (demonstrating that a higher level of congressional
   deliberation over a use of force influences Congress to impose a higher level of
   control over presidential war power).
62 See JOHN RAWLS, POLITICAL LIBERALISM 223 (1993); see also id. at 217 (“Our exercise
   of political power is proper and hence justified only when it is exercised in
   accordance with a constitution the essentials of which all citizens may reasonably be
   expected to endorse in the light of principles and ideals acceptable to them as
   reasonable and rational. This is the liberal principle of legitimacy. And since the
   exercise of political power itself must be legitimate, the ideals of citizenship impose
   a moral, not a legal, duty—the duty of civility—to be able to explain to one another
   on those fundamental questions how the principles and policies they advocate and
   vote for can be supported by the political values of public reason.”). For a discussion
   of this concept, see, e.g., Gillian K. Hadfield & Stephen Macedo, Rational
   Reasonableness: Toward a Positive Theory of Public Reason, 6 Law & ETHICS HUM.
   RTS. 5, 7 (2012) (pointing at the role that public reason plays in stabilizing a political
   conception of justice).
36                                                   《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯



residents of occupied territories, or members of an ethnic minority which
bears a heavier burden of certain anti-terrorist measures (through explicit
or implicit profiling strategies). An appeal to public reason requires the
decision-makers to present valid justifications for inflicting (unintended)
harm on enemy civilians, to justify a position which assigns different
values to people’s lives according to their nationality, and so forth.

       Moreover, the requirement to hold public deliberations may
contribute to mitigate the concern of the institutional bias of law
enforcement and security agencies, whose primary goal is to fight crime
and terror.63 As explained by Justice Souter in the Hamdi case, “[i]n a
government of separated powers, deciding finally on what is a
reasonable degree of guaranteed liberty whether in peace or war (or
some condition in between) is not well entrusted to the Executive
Branch of Government, whose particular responsibility is to maintain
security. For reasons of inescapable human nature, the branch of the
Government asked to counter a serious threat is not the branch on which
to rest the Nation’s entire reliance in striking the balance between the
will to win and the cost in liberty on the way to victory; the
responsibility for security will naturally amplify the claim that security
legitimately raises.”64 Imposing the government to justify the measures
which it views as appropriate, by appeal to public reason, may
substantially mitigate this risk.

       Legislation as an Essential Form of Scrutinizing Governmental
Activities. An important argument in favor of requiring the involvement
of the legislature is the concern that in times of crises there is no

63 See, e.g., Thomas P. Crocker, Torture, with Apologies, 86 TEX. L. REV. 569, 585-93
     (2008).
64 Hamdi, 542 U.S. at 545 (Souter J., concurring).
Keynote Address: Legislating Responses to Security Threats                     37



effective way to appropriately scrutinize the activities of the Executive
Branch. The lack of adequate information and the high risk which is
involved in such decisions make the efficacy of the parliament’s
supervision powers very limited.65 Typically, parliaments do not hold
formal powers to supervise the use of military measures in specific
instances. They are empowered to direct the government’s activities only
through legislation.

     It should be noted that according to one model, the Executive
Branch is provided with “inherent” powers to take certain anti-terrorist
measures only as long as the legislature explicitly declares that a security
threat exists (“a state of emergency,” “a state of war,” and so forth).
However, this model is not suited to address the current concern. It is
doubtful whether the parliament is suited to hold a thorough and
independent review of the government call to declare a state of
emergency. The Israeli experience demonstrates such a failure:
according to Israeli law, the government enjoys an almost limitless
power to enact, in times of national emergency, regulations that curtail,
and even to derogate basic liberties. The Israeli parliament declared “a
state of emergency” within four days after the foundation of the country,
at times in which the state’s existence was indeed in real danger, but it
has extended this declaration ever since, and Israel is thus in a
continuous state of emergency for more than sixty years now. More
generally, declaring a “state of emergency” is typically not as politically
costly as explicit authorization in legislation to take specific measures,
and it is thus not as effective as the requirement of legislation in


65 See Heiner Hänggi, The Use of Force under International Auspices: Parliamentary
   Accountability and “Democratic Deficits”, in THE “DOUBLE DEMOCRATIC DEFICIT”
   3 (Hans Born & Heiner Hänggi eds., 2004).
38                                                 《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯



restraining the government. Carl Schmitt has famously argued that it is
simply impossible to develop effective constitutional constraints on the
use of armed force, for in moments of crisis such constitutional
provisions will be simply ignored. 66 It seems that this theory is
particularly powerful in reference to this model of providing the
government with unlimited powers whenever a state of emergency is
declared.67

       It seems that the only effective way to induce the legislature to take
part in reviewing the executive is by the continued operation of a thick
substantive notion of the rule of law during the period of emergency.
Enforcing the requirement of legislation calls upon the parliament to
share with the government the political responsibility for the use of the
relevant measures. The prediction that the legislature may take an
important role in restraining an unjustified use of force is based not only
on the evaluation of the expected outcome of deliberations in
parliament. 68 It is the political costs that are involved in formally
legislating the legitimacy of taking certain measures that serve as the
main check. Absent an overwhelming or obvious threat, the procedural
requirements to obtain support of the majority of the legislature would

66 CARL SCHMITT, POLITICAL THEOLOGY, FOUR CHAPTERS ON THE CONCEPT OF
     SOVEREIGNTY (George Schwab trans., University of Chicago Press 2006) (1922).
67 See, e.g., Ferejohn & Pasquino, supra note 5, at 216 (“the dangers carried by the
   exercise of emergency authority are too great to be used in any but the most dire
   circumstances.”). For a critical analysis of Schmitt’s theory, see, e.g., David
   Dyzenhaus, Schmitt v. Dicey: Are States of Emergency Inside or Outside the Legal
   Order?, 27 CARDOZO L. REV. 2005, 2030-37 (2006); Oren Gross, The Normless and
   the Exceptionless Exception: Carl Schmitt’s Theory of Emergency Powers and the
   “Norm-Exception” Dichotomy, 21 CARDOZO L. REV. 1825, 1827-29 (2000).
68 See, e.g., Martin, supra note 59, at 684 (“The risks [of] irrational or sub-optimal
   decisions to use armed force would be reduced, in the case of each of these particular
   phenomenon, by spreading the decision-making process more widely through the
   inclusion of the legislative body.”).
Keynote Address: Legislating Responses to Security Threats                               39



impose significant political costs upon the executive, both domestically
and internationally.69

      The Israeli experience in this respect is again illuminating. Its
security service, the GSS used force in interrogation for more than a
decade. This practice was not a secret, and was even approved by a
public committee appointed to investigate the matter.70 Interestingly,
this practice violated not only international law but also an explicit
provision of the Israeli criminal code, which prohibits the use of force in
interrogation (section 277 of the Criminal code, 1977).71 However, the
use of force in interrogations of suspected terrorists was considered
permissible according to the criminal law defense of necessity. The
Israeli parliament did not scrutinize this practice, and can be assumed to
implicitly approve it. In 1999, when the Supreme Court held that absent
explicit authorization such a practice is prohibited,72 one could have


69 Lori Fisler Damrosch, The Interface of Using National Constitutional Systems
   with International Law and Institutions on Military Forces, in DEMOCRATIC
   ACCOUNTABILITY AND THE USE OF FORCE IN INTERNATIONAL LAW 39, 58-60
   (Charlotte Ku & Harold K. Jacobson eds., 2003).
70 COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO THE METHODS OF INVESTIGATION OF THE GENERAL
   SECURITY SERVICE REGARDING HOSTILE TERRORIST ACTIVITY, REPORT (1987) [in
   Hebrew]. For English translation of excerpts from the Report, see Part I of the
   Landau Commission Report, 23 ISR. L. REV. 146 (1989). For a critical analysis of the
   Landau Commission Report, see Mordechai Kremnitzer, The Landau Commission
   Report – Was the Security Service Subordinated to the Law, or the Law to the
   “Needs” of the Security Service?, 23 ISR. L. REV. 216 (1989). The Supreme Court of
   Israel rejected petitions against the GSS practices of interrogation. HCJ 2581/91
   Salahat v. The Government of Israel, 47(4) PD 837 [1993] (Isr.); HCJ 70/95 Amar v.
   GSS [1996] (Isr.); HCJ 5395/94 Abu Kwieder v. The Commander of the Military
   Prison in Hebron [1995] (Isr.).
71 This provision prohibits officials to use force against a person or to threaten to do so,
   in order to make this person confess in committing a crime or providing information
   about a crime.
72 HCJ 5100/94 Public Committee Against Torture in Israel v. Government of Israel,
   53(4) PD 817 [1999] (Isr.).
40                                               《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯



assumed that the government, who strongly advocated for maintaining it
by suggesting that the lives of dozens of persons are at risk if the GSS
cannot use force in interrogating suspected terrorists, could easily
convince the legislature to legislate a provision authorizing this practice.
However, after almost three years of deliberations, the government
preferred not to ask for such authorization. It was clear that even though
the majority would probably approve such a measure, the political costs
of such legislation are too high. The mere enforcement of the
requirement to legislate was sufficient, despite the majority’s support in
this measure, to change the practice.

     Rulifying the Fight on Terror. Imposing the requirement of explicit
authorization is also based on the concept of the rule of law, as it
requires the government to act on the basis of general, overt, predictable
norms, in accordance with the requirements of formal justice.73

     Refraining from setting guidelines ex ante is unfair to actors who
are exposed to the risk of bearing civil and criminal liability if it turns
out that their judgment regarding the permissibility of the infringement
is different from that of the ex post reviewer. In fact, the absence of an ex
ante authorization may result in officials refraining from taking justified
measures. Prior authorization may thus be necessary to encourage risk-
averse agents,74 who are reluctant to “dirty their hands,” to nevertheless
promote the overall good when such action involves a justified
infringement of a moral constraint.75 Thus, even those whose major

73 See, e.g., H.L.A. HART, THE CONCEPT OF LAW (2d ed. 1994).
74 Nathan A. Sales, Self Restraint and National Security, 6 J. NAT’L SEC. L. & POL’Y
   227, 269 (2012) (George Mason Law & Economics Research Paper No. 10-41, 2010)
   (arguing that self restraint might be the result of systematic risk aversion within
   military and intelligence agencies).
75 For the “dirty hands” argument, see, e.g., Michael Walzer, Political Action: The
Keynote Address: Legislating Responses to Security Threats                             41



concern is inducing the executive to take the necessary measures in
response to security threats should in fact support the requirement of
prior authorization in legislation.76 In modern states most emergencies
can be successfully managed by the operation of the ordinary legal-
constitutional system, and it can reasonably assumed that the legislature
will be actually willing to enact statutes conceding new powers to the
executive in the face of unique circumstances.77 Finally, such legislation
may also narrow the scope of judicial review of military actions.78

2. Symbolic Costs of Legitimizing Human Rights
   Infringements in Legislation

      Some scholars object to determining in legislation the permissibility
of measures taken in the fight against terrorism by pointing at the
expressive role of such authorization. This objection rests on the notion
that legal provisions do not only impose duties and convey rights. They
also express attitudes, shape public perceptions, and may thus inflict


   Problem of Dirty Hands, 2 PHIL. & PUB. AFF. 160 (1973) (suggesting that moral
   public officials are the ones willing to get their hands dirty by choosing to violate a
   constraint to bring about a sufficiently high social good).
76 See, e.g., Jide Nzelibe & John Yoo, Rational War and Constitutional Design, 115
   YALE L.J. 2512, 2530-32 (2006) (suggesting that the increased political costs of
   obtaining parliamentary approval can help to generate public support and signal the
   depth of commitment to potential adversaries).
77 Ferejohn & Pasquino, supra note 5, at 216-18. See also Deborah Pearlstein, Form
   and Function in the National Security Constitution, 41 CONN. L. REV. 1549 (2009)
   (arguing that “organization analysis” supports involving the legislature in forming
   responses to security threats).
78 Issacharoff & Pildes, supra note 50, at 1-5 (suggesting that where both legislature
   and executive endorse a particular tradeoff of liberty and security, the courts have
   accepted that judgment; but where the executive has flown in the face of legislative
   policies or without legislative approval, the courts have invalidated executive action,
   even during wartime, or scrutinized it more closely); Barak-Erez, supra note 5, at
   893 (“when anti-terrorism measures are legislated, the tendency of courts to review
   them is likely to be more restrained.”).
42                                                   《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯



“expressive” harm. For instance, a statute authorizing the torture of a
suspect terrorist or the killing of an innocent person, even only in very
rare circumstances, can be considered disrespectful of human dignity.
According to this objection, agents, including public officials, may act
extra-legally when necessary in the face of calamity,79 but such acts
should only be evaluated ex post factum.80 This position is implicit, for
instance, in the German Constitutional Court’s judgment regarding the
validity of a statute authorizing officials to shoot down an aircraft that is
being wielded as a deadly weapon.81 The court held that granting an ex
ante authorization to inflict such harm is unacceptable, but did not rule
out the possibility of granting a criminal law defense to officials who
resort to such measures, if the action is deemed justified ex post.82 At
the core of this view lies the concern that formal legitimization of
infringements is objectionable from a deontological perspective and
undesirable from a consequentialist one.83

       As for deontological concerns, justifiably infringing basic liberties
or other deontological constraints to attain a desirable outcome is


79 See, e.g., RICHARD A. POSNER, NOT A SUICIDE PACT: THE CONSTITUTION IN A TIME OF
     NATIONAL EMERGENCY 152-58 (2006).
80 See, e.g., Oren Gross, Are Torture Warrants Warranted? Pragmatic Absolutism and
   Official Disobedience, 88 MINN. L. REV. 1481, 1526-34 (2004); Alon Harel & Assaf
   Sharon, “Necessity Knows No Law”: On Extreme Cases and Uncodifiable
   Necessities, 61 U. TORONTO L.J. 845 (2011).
81 Bundesverfassungsgericht [BVerfG] [Federal Constitutional Court] Feb. 15, BvR
   375/05, available at http://www.bundesverfassungs gericht.de/entscheidungen/
   rs20060215_1bvr035705.html.
82 Id. at § 128. See also article 8(2)(b)(xxiii) of the Statute of the International Criminal
   Court; Gross, supra note 80, at 1528 (proposing “an absolute legal ban on torture
   while, at the same time, recognizing the possibility… of state agents acting
   extralegally... and seeking ex post ratification of their conduct.”).
83 The discussion in this subsection is based, in part, on EYAL ZAMIR & BARAK MEDINA,
   LAW, ECONOMICS, AND MORALITY 117-22 (2010).
Keynote Address: Legislating Responses to Security Threats                            43



different from attaining the same outcome without infringing any
constraint. Arguably, agents who act in accordance with ex ante
authorization to infringe a constraint may lose sight of this fundamental
moral distinction. Prior authorization may turn the actor’s decision-
making process into a rather technical assessment of whether the
conditions set forth by the legislature are met, without giving sufficient
attention to the nature of the action as an infringement of a constraint,
and of the constraint’s underlying rationales.84 A law that expresses,
even inadvertently, an improper message should arguably be invalidated
even if its content and expected outcomes are desirable.85 The very
formulation of rules that determine when it is permissible to kill or
torture people is disrespectful of human dignity. Extreme emergencies
may indeed compel one to do horrible things to prevent catastrophic
outcomes. However, respect for people requires that such acts be
“unprincipled, context-generated;” they “ought to be performed strictly
as acts of necessity, not as acts governed by principles.”86

      I find these arguments unpersuasive. For one thing, many anti-
terrorist measures are deemed permissible under rather “regular”
circumstances, not merely under extreme ones. Moreover, even if one
focuses on such extreme measures like killing and torture, if no


84 Cf. Elizabeth S. Anderson & Richard H. Pildes, Expressive Theories of Law: A
   General Restatement, 148 U. PA. L. REV. 1503, 1512 (2000); Sanford H. Kadish,
   Torture, the State and the Individual, 23 ISR. L. REV. 345, 353 (1989).
85 Anderson & Pildes, supra note 84, at 1513. For a critique, see Steven D. Smith,
   Expressivist Jurisprudence and the Depletion of Meaning, 60 MD. L. REV. 506, 520
   (2001).
86 Harel & Sharon, supra note 80, at 848. See also CHARLES FRIED, RIGHT AND WRONG
   10 (1978) (arguing that “the concept of the catastrophic is a distinct concept just
   because it identifies the extreme situations in which the usual categories of judgment
   (including the category of right and wrong) no longer apply”); Oren Gross, Torture
   and an Ethics of Responsibility, 3 LAW, CULTURE & HUMAN. 35, 44 (2007).
44                                                 《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯



principles govern the behavior of agents in extreme cases, how would
agents decide whether the circumstances they face are truly extreme?
How can one judge, in retrospect, whether the infringement was justified?
Once it is accepted that basic liberties may justifiably be infringed under
certain circumstances, there is no escape from delineating those
circumstances. In addition, this argument is relevant in the current
context only with respect to the marginal effect of justifying certain
measures through legislation, since, at least in some countries, the
judiciary sets rules of behavior that justify taking numerous anti-terrorist
measures, such that the adverse symbolic effect, if exists, was already
done. It is doubtful whether the “expressive” effect of legislation is
substantially greater than that of forward looking “judicial legislation.”

      Another argument that can be raised against ex ante authorization is
that such authorization is likely to bring about unjustified activities.87 It
may lead to routine use, or at least routine consideration, of measures
that should be taken, or even considered, only in extreme and rare
circumstances.88 In certain contexts, for instance the case of authorizing

87 For a discussion of theories of “expressive law and economics,” which accentuate
   the effect of “what the law says” (rather than of “what the law does”) on preferences
   and behavior, see, e.g., Richard H. McAdams, An Attitudinal Theory of Expressive
   Law, 79 OR. L. REV. 339 (2000); Robert Cooter, Expressive Law and Economics, 27
   J. LEGAL STUD. 585 (1998); Robert D. Cooter, Do Good Laws Make Good Citizens?
   An Economic Analysis of Internalized Norms, 86 VA. L. REV. 1577 (2000).
88 Henry Shue, Torture, 7 PHIL. & PUB. AFF. 124, 141 (1978) (arguing that while torture
   may be justified when it is the least harmful means available to secure a supremely
   important aim, it should nevertheless be strictly prohibited, since “[a]ny practice of
   torture once set in motion would gain enough momentum to burst any bonds and
   become a standard operating procedure”); David Luban, Liberalism, Torture, and the
   Ticking Bomb, 91 VA. L. REV. 1425, 1446 (2005) (contending that once coercive
   interrogation is allowed in any circumstances, it will be used casually, and a “culture
   of torture” will come into being); Harold Hongju Koh, Can the President Be Torturer
   in Chief?, 81 IND. L.J. 1145, 1165 (2006); John H. Langbein, The Legal History of
   Torture, in TORTURE: A COLLECTION 93, 101 (Sanford Levinson ed., 2004); Jean
Keynote Address: Legislating Responses to Security Threats                              45



coercive interrogations, it may also induce the establishment of
institutions that would train agents to act accordingly, thus making
infringements an even more readily available option. 89 It was also
suggested that legislating taking extreme measures may enable officials
to maintain what is known as “role distance.” The message to the official
is that the legislator decided that the measure is appropriate, and that
person is not expected to employ sufficient discretion whether taking the
measure is indeed legitimate in the circumstances.90 More generally, it
is argued that due to its expressive effects, legitimizing an infringement
in certain circumstances may be (wrongly) perceived as implicitly
legitimizing it in other circumstances too. 91 These “slippery slope”
arguments suggest that even though legitimizing a (presumably justified)
activity in one set of circumstances does not logically legitimize it under
different circumstances, the former is prone to bring about the latter due
to political and psychological reasons.92

      While the slippery slope argument cannot be ignored, it does not
necessarily preclude predetermined guidelines for the permissibility of


   Bethke Elshtain, Reflection on the Problem of “Dirty Hands”, in TORTURE: A
   COLLECTION 77 (Sanford Levinson ed., 2004) .
89 See, e.g., Henry Shue, Torture in Dreamland: Disposing of the Ticking Bomb, 37
   CASE W. RES. J. INT’L L. 231, 238 (2006); Kremnitzer, supra note 70, at 216, 254-57.
90 MEIR DAN-COHEN, HARMFUL THOUGHTS: ESSAYS ON LAW, SELF, AND MORALITY
   233-35 (2002); Gur-Arye, supra note 15, at 305.
91 In addition, “liberties won slowly over long periods of time may be subject to rapid
   erosion in emergencies and these new restrictions, if they are embedded in law, may
   not be rapidly restored if they are restored at all.” Ferejohn & Pasquino, supra note 5,
   at 219. See also Barak-Erez, supra note 5, at 893 (“The tendency to abolish anti-
   terrorism powers established by legislation is low, probably reflecting the
   assumption that it is better to have them available ‘for a rainy day’.”).
92 Bernard Williams, Which Slopes Are Slippery?, in MORAL DILEMMAS IN MODERN
   MEDICINE 127, 128 (Michael Lockwood ed., 1985); see Eugene Volokh, The
   Mechanisms of the Slippery Slope, 116 HARV. L. REV. 1026 (2003).
46                                                《憲法解釋之理論與實務》第八輯



infringements. For one thing, the absence of ex ante authorization may
result in people (including officials) refraining from taking justified
measures, as suggested above. Moreover, such authorization may be
accompanied by measures that deter unjustified activities. Accurately
evaluating these and other considerations is difficult, yet at the very least
they make the slippery slope argument inconclusive.

       For these reasons, while I agree that legislation authorizing the
government to take extreme measures in response to security threats may
well have adverse symbolic effects, these costs are not a sufficient
reason to exempt the government from the requirement of legality. In
fact, making these symbolic effects a decisive reason against legislation
directly contradicts the very basic reasons for insisting on legislation in
the first place, including the deliberative value of the process of
legislation and the political costs associated with such legislation. If the
government finds it impossible to openly justify its activities, it should
not be shielded from scrutiny by referring to arguments of the sort of
“acoustic separation.” 93 If the “noise” is troubling, the government
should not make it, not merely conceal it behind “acoustic” walls.



IV. Concluding Remarks

       There are good reasons to enforce the requirement of explicit
authorization in law to take specific anti-terrorist measures. The ultimate
question is what types of measures should be “determine[d] through
democratic means.” I suggest that the requirement should apply to


93 See Meir Dan-Cohen, Decision Rules and Conduct Rules: On Acoustic Separation in
     Criminal Law, 97 HARV. L. REV. 625 (1984).
Keynote Address: Legislating Responses to Security Threats              47



measures which infringe upon basic human rights, including rights of
aliens, even those who are suspected terrorists. Measures which are
aimed at killing persons or infringing other basic liberties can be
employed only subject to legislative authorization (or when the
circumstances are exigent), irrespective of the nationality of the persons
subject to such measures and the place in which the governmental
activity takes place. As indicated, legislation provides the required
authority only when it explicitly addresses specific measures and details
the circumstances in which each of them can be employed.
